
The present volume may be considered as one of the
consequences that have resulted from the calculating engine, the
construction of which I have been so long superintending. Having
been induced, during the last ten years, to visit a considerable
number of workshops and factories, both in England and on the
Continent, for the purpose of endeavouring to make myself
acquainted with the various resources of mechanical art, I was
insensibly led to apply to them those principles of
generalization to which my other pursuits had naturally given
rise. The increased number of curious processes and interesting
facts which thus came under my attention, as well as of the
reflections which they suggested, induced me to believe that the
publication of some of them might be of use to persons who
propose to bestow their attention on those enquiries which I have
only incidentally considered. With this view it was my intention
to have delivered the present work in the form of a course of
lectures at Cambridge; an intention which I was subsequently
induced to alter. The substance of a considerable portion of it
has, however, appeared among the preliminary chapters of the
mechanical part of the Encyclopedia Metropolitana.

I have not attempted to offer a complete enumeration of all
the mechanical principles which regulate the application of
machinery to arts and manufactures, but I have endeavoured to
present to the reader those which struck me as the most
important, either for understanding the actions of machines, or
for enabling the memory to classify and arrange the facts
connected with their employment. Still less have I attempted to
examine all the difficult questions of political economy which
are intimately connected with such enquiries. It was impossible
not to trace or to imagine, among the wide variety of facts
presented to me, some principles which seemed to pervade many
establishments; and having formed such conjectures, the desire to
refute or to verify them, gave an additional interest to the
pursuit. Several of the principles which I have proposed, appear
to me to have been unnoticed before. This was particularly the
case with respect to the explanation I have given of the division
of labour; but further enquiry satisfied me that I had been
anticipated by M. Gioja, and it is probable that additional
research would enable me to trace most of the other principles,
which I had thought original, to previous writers, to whose merit
I may perhaps be unjust, from my want of acquaintance with the
historical branch of the subject.

The truth however of the principles I have stated, is of much
more importance than their origin; and the utility of an enquiry
into them, and of establishing others more correct, if these
should be erroneous, can scarcely admit of a doubt.

The difficulty of understanding the processes of manufactures
has unfortunately been greatly overrated. To examine them with
the eye of a manufacturer, so as to be able to direct others to
repeat them, does undoubtedly require much skill and previous
acquaintance with the subject; but merely to apprehend their
general principles and mutual relations, is within the power of
almost every person possessing a tolerable education.

Those who possess rank in a manufacturing country, can
scarcely be excused if they are entirely ignorant of principles,
whose development has produced its greatness. The possessors of
wealth can scarcely be indifferent to processes which, nearly or
remotely have been the fertile source of their possessions. Those
who enjoy leisure can scarcely find a more interesting and
instructive pursuit than the examination of the workshops of
their own country, which contain within them a rich mine of
knowledge, too generally neglected by the wealthier classes.

It has been my endeavour, as much as possible, to avoid all
technical terms, and to describe, in concise language, the arts I
have had occasion to discuss. In touching on the more abstract
principles of political economy, after shortly stating the
reasons on which they are founded, I have endeavoured to support
them by facts and anecdotes; so that whilst young persons might
be amused and instructed by the illustrations, those of more
advanced judgement may find subject for meditation in the general
conclusions to which they point. I was anxious to support the
principles which I have advocated by the observations of others,
and in this respect I found myself peculiarly fortunate. The
reports of committees of the House of Commons, upon various
branches of commerce and manufactures, and the evidence which
they have at different periods published on those subjects, teem
with information of the most important kind, rendered doubly
valuable by the circumstances under which it has been collected.
From these sources I have freely taken, and I have derived some
additional confidence from the support they have afforded to my
views. *

Charles Babbage
Dorset Street
Manchester Square
8 June, 1832

[*Footnote: I am happy to avail myself of this occasion of expressing
my obligations to the Right Hon. Manners Sutton, the Speaker of the
House of Commons, to whom I am indebted for copies of a considerable
collection of those reports.]


Preface to the Second Edition


In two months from the publication of the first edition of
this volume, three thousand copies were in the hands of the
public. Very little was spent in advertisements; the booksellers,
instead of aiding, impeded its sale; * it formed no part of any
popular series and yet the public, in a few weeks, purchased the
whole edition. Some small part of this success, perhaps, was due
to the popular exposition of those curious processes which are
carried on in our workshops, and to the endeavour to take a short
view of the general principles which direct the manufactories of
the country. But the chief reason was the commanding attraction
of the subject, and the increasing desire to become acquainted
with the pursuits and interests of that portion of the people
which has recently acquired so large an accession of political
influence.


[*Footnote: I had good evidence of this fact from various quarters;
and being desirous of verifying it, I myself applied for a copy at
the shop of a bookseller of respectability, who is probably not aware
that he refused to procure one even for its author.]


A greater degree of attention than I had expected has been
excited by what I have stated in the first edition, respecting
the 'Book-trade'. Until I had commenced the chapter, 'On the
separate cost of each process of a manufacture', I had no
intention of alluding to that subject: but the reader will
perceive that I have throughout this volume, wherever I could,
employed as illustrations, objects of easy access to the reader;
and, in accordance with that principle, I selected the volume
itself. When I arrived at the chapter, 'On combinations of
masters against the public', I was induced, for the same reason,
to expose a combination connected with literature, which, in my
opinion, is both morally and politically wrong. I entered upon
this enquiry without the slightest feeling of hostility to that
trade, nor have I any wish unfavourable to it; but I think a
complete reform in its system would add to its usefulness and
respectability. As the subject of that chapter has been much
discussed, I have thought it right to take a view of the various
arguments which have been advanced, and to offer my own opinion
respecting their validity--and there I should have left the
subject, content to allow my general character to plead for me
against insinuations respecting my motives--but as the remarks
of some of my critics affect the character of another person, I
think it but just to state circumstances which will clearly
disprove them.

Mr Fellowes, of Ludgate Street, who had previously been the
publisher of some other volumes for me, had undertaken the
publication of the first edition of the present work. A short
time previous to its completion, I thought it right to call his
attention to the chapter in which the book-trade is discussed;
with the view both of making him acquainted with what I had
stated, and also of availing myself of his knowledge in
correcting any accidental error as to the facts. Mr Fellowes,
'differing from me entirely respecting the conclusions I had
arrived at', then declined the publication of the volume. If I
had then chosen to apply to some of those other booksellers,
whose names appear in the Committee of 'The Trade', it is
probable that they also would have declined the office of
publishing for me; and, had my object been to make a case against
the trade, such a course would have assisted me. But I had no
such feeling; and having procured a complete copy of the whole
work, I called with it on Mr Knight, of Pall Mall East, whom
until that day I had never seen, and with whom I had never
previously had the slightest communication. I left the book in Mr
Knight's hands, with a request that, when he had read it, I might
be informed whether he would undertake the publication of it; and
this he consented to do. Mr Knight, therefore, is so far from
being responsible for a single opinion in the present volume,
that he saw it only, for a short time, a few days previous to its
publication.

It has been objected to me, that I have exposed too freely
the secrets of trade. The only real secrets of trade are
industry, integrity, and knowledge: to the possessors of these no
exposure can be injurious; and they never fail to produce respect
and wealth.

The alterations in the present edition are so frequent, that
I found it impossible to comprise them in a supplement. But the
three new chapters, 'On money as a medium of exchange'; 'On a new
system of manufacturing'; and 'On the effect of machinery in
reducing the demand for labour'; will shortly be printed
separately, for the use of the purchasers of the first edition.

I am inclined to attach some importance to the new system of
manufacturing; and venture to throw it out with the hope of its
receiving a full discussion among those who are most interested
in the subject. I believe that some such system of conducting
manufactories would greatly increase the productive powers of any
country adopting it; and that our own possesses much greater
facilities for its application than other countries, in the
greater intelligence and superior education of the working
classes. The system would naturally commence in some large town,
by the union of some of the most prudent and active workmen; and
their example, if successful, would be followed by others. The
small capitalist would next join them, and such factories would
go on increasing until competition compelled the large capitalist
to adopt the same system; and, ultimately, the whole faculties of
every man engaged in manufacture would be concentrated upon one
object--the art of producing a good article at the lowest
possible cost--whilst the moral effect on that class of the
population would be useful in the highest degree, since it would
render character of far greater value to the workman than it is
at present.

To one criticism which has been made, this volume is
perfectly open. I have dismissed the important subject of the
patent-laws in a few lines. The subject presents, in my opinion,
great difficulties, and I have been unwilling to write upon it,
because I do not see my way. I will only here advert to one
difficulty. What constitutes an invention? Few simple mechanical
contrivances are new; and most combinations may be viewed as
species, and classed under genera of more or less generality; and
may, in consequence, be pronounced old or new, according to the
mechanical knowledge of the person who gives his opinion.

Some of my critics have amused their readers with the
wildness of the schemes I have occasionally thrown out; and I
myself have sometimes smiled along with them. Perhaps it were
wiser for present reputation to offer nothing but profoundly
meditated plans, but I do not think knowledge will be most
advanced by that course; such sparks may kindle the energies of
other minds more favourably circumstanced for pursuing the
enquiries. Thus I have now ventured to give some speculations on
the mode of blowing furnaces for smelting iron; and even
supposing them to be visionary, it is of some importance thus to
call the attention of a large population, engaged in one of our
most extensive manufactures, to the singular fact, that
four-fifths of the steam power used to blow their furnaces
actually cools them.

I have collected, with some pains, the criticisms* on the
first edition of this work, and have availed myself of much
information which has been communicated to me by my friends, for
the improvement of the present volume. If I have succeeded in
expressing what I had to explain with perspicuity, I am aware
that much of this clearness is due to my friend, Dr Fitton, to
whom both the present and the former edition are indebted for
such an examination and correction, as an author himself has very
rarely the power to bestow.


[*Footnote: Several of these have probably escaped me, and I shall
feel indebted to any one who will inform my publisher of any future
remarks.]


22 November, 1832.




Section I.




INTRODUCTION.

The object of the present volume is to point out the effects
and the advantages which arise from the use of tools and
machines;--to endeavour to classify their modes of action;--and to
trace both the causes and the consequences of applying machinery
to supersede the skill and power of the human arm.

A view of the mechanical part of the subject will, in the
first instance, occupy our attention, and to this the first
section of the work will be devoted. The first chapter of the
section will contain some remarks on the general sources from
whence the advantages of machinery are derived, and the
succeeding nine chapters will contain a detailed examination of
principles of a less general character. The eleventh chapter
contains numerous subdivisions, and is important from the
extensive classification it affords of the arts in which copying
is so largely employed. The twelfth chapter, which completes the
first section, contains a few suggestions for the assistance of
those who propose visiting manufactories.

The second section, after an introductory chapter on the
difference between making and manufacturing, will contain, in the
succeeding chapters, a discussion of many of the questions which
relate to the political economy of the subject. It was found that
the domestic arrangement, or interior economy of factories, was
so interwoven with the more general questions, that it was deemed
unadvisable to separate the two subjects. The concluding chapter
of this section, and of the work itself, relates to the future
prospects of manufactures, as arising from the application of
science.



Chapter 1

Sources of the Advantages arising from Machinery and Manufactures

1. There exists, perhaps, no single circumstance which
distinguishes our country more remarkably from all others, than
the vast extent and perfection to which we have carried the
contrivance of tools and machines for forming those conveniences
of which so large a quantity is consumed by almost every class of
the community. The amount of patient thought, of repeated
experiment, of happy exertion of genius, by which our
manufactures have been created and carried to their present
excellence, is scarcely to be imagined. If we look around the
rooms we inhabit, or through those storehouses of every
convenience, of every luxury that man can desire, which deck the
crowded streets of our larger cities, we shall find in the
history of each article, of every fabric, a series of failures
which have gradually led the way to excellence; and we shall
notice, in the art of making even the most insignificant of them,
processes calculated to excite our admiration by their
simplicity, or to rivet our attention by their unlooked-for
results.

2. The accumulation of skill and science which has been
directed to diminish the difficulty of producing manufactured
goods, has not been beneficial to that country alone in which it
is concentrated; distant kingdoms have participated in its
advantages. The luxurious natives of the East,(1*) and the ruder
inhabitants of the African desert are alike indebted to our
looms. The produce of our factories has preceded even our most
enterprising travellers.(2*) The cotton of India is conveyed by
British ships round half our planet, to be woven by British skill
in the factories of Lancashire: it is again set in motion by
British capital; and, transported to the very plains whereon it
grew, is repurchased by the lords of the soil which gave it
birth, at a cheaper price than that at which their coarser
machinery enables them to manufacture it themselves.(3*)

3. The large proportion of the population of this country,
who are engaged in manufactures, appears from the following table
deduced from a statement in an Essay on the Distribution of
Wealth, by the Rev. R. Jones:

For every hundred persons employed in agriculture, there are:

                    Agriculturists Non-agriculturists

 In Bengal          100             25
 In Italy           100             31
 In France          100             50
 In England         100             200


The fact that the proportion of non-agricultural to
agricultural persons is continually increasing, appears both from
the Report of the Committee of the House of Commons upon
Manufacturers' Employment, July, 1830, and from the still later
evidence of the last census; from which document the annexed
table of the increase of population in our great manufacturing
towns, has been deduced.

Increase of population per cent

Names of places
                     1801-11   1811-21   1821-31   Total
Manchester           22        40        47       151
Glasgow              30        46        38       161
Liverpool(4*)        26        31        44       138
Nottingham           19        18        25        75
Birmingham           16        24        33        90
Great Britain        14.2      15.7      15.5      52.5


Thus, in three periods of ten years, during each of which the
general population of the country has increased about 15 per
cent, or about 52 per cent upon the whole period of thirty years,
the population of these towns has, on the average, increased 132
per cent. After this statement, there requires no further
argument to demonstrate the vast importance to the well-being of
this country, of making the interests of its manufacturers well
understood and attended to.

4. The advantages which are derived from machinery and
manufactures seem to arise principally from three sources: The
addition which they make to human power. The economy they produce
of human time. The conversion of substances apparently common and
worthless into valuable products.

5. Of additions to human power. With respect to the first of
these causes, the forces derived from wind, from water, and from
steam, present themselves to the mind of every one; these are, in
fact, additions to human power, and will be considered in a
future page: there are, however, other sources of its increase,
by which the animal force of the individual is itself made to act
with far greater than its unassisted power; and to these we shall
at present confine our observations.

The construction of palaces, of temples, and of tombs, seems
to have occupied the earliest attention of nations just entering
on the career of civilization; and the enormous blocks of stone
moved from their native repositories to minister to the grandeur
or piety of the builders, have remained to excite the
astonishment of their posterity, long after the purposes of many
of these records, as well as the names of their founders, have
been forgotten. The different degrees of force necessary to move
these ponderous masses, will have varied according to the
mechanical knowledge of the people employed in their transport;
and that the extent of power required for this purpose is widely
different under different circumstances, will appear from the
following experiment, which is related by M. Rondelet, Sur L'Art
de Batir. A block of squared stone was taken for the subject of
experiment:

1. Weight of stone 1080 lbs

2. In order to drag this stone along the floor of the quarry,
roughly chiselled, it required a force equal to 758 lbs

3. The same stone dragged over a floor of planks required 652 lbs

4. The same stone placed on a platform of wood, and dragged over
a floor of planks, required 606 lbs

5. After soaping the two surfaces of wood which slid over each
other, it required 182 lbs

6. The same stone was now placed upon rollers of three inches
diameter, when it required to put it in motion along the floor of
the quarry 34 lbs

7. To drag it by these rollers over a wooden floor 28 lbs

8. When the stone was mounted on a wooden platform, and the same
rollers placed between that and a plank floor, it required 22 lbs


From this experiment it results, that the force necessary to
move a stone along

                                     Part of its weight

The roughly chiselled floor of its quarry is nearly 2/3
Along a wooden floor                                3/5
By wood upon wood                                   5/9
If the wooden surfaces are soaped                   1/6
With rollers on the floor of the quarry             1/32
On rollers on wood                                  1/40
On rollers between wood                             1/50


At each increase of knowledge, as well as on the contrivance
of every new tool, human labour becomes abridged. The man who
contrived rollers, invented a tool by which his power was
quintupled. The workman who first suggested the employment of
soap or grease, was immediately enabled to move, without exerting
a greater effort, more than three times the weight he could
before.(5*)

6. The economy of human time is the next advantage of
machinery in manufactures. So extensive and important is this
effect, that we might, if we were inclined to generalize, embrace
almost all the advantages under this single head: but the
elucidation of principles of less extent will contribute more
readily to a knowledge of the subject; and, as numerous examples
will be presented to the reader in the ensuing pages, we shall
restrict our illustrations upon this point.

As an example of the economy of time, the use of gunpowder in
blasting rocks may be noticed. Several pounds of powder may be
purchased for a sum acquired by a few days' labour: yet when this
is employed for the purpose alluded to, effects are frequently
produced which could not, even with the best tools, be
accomplished by other means in less than many months.

The dimensions of one of the blocks of limestone extracted
from the quarries worked for the formation of the breakwater at
Plymouth were 26 1/2 ft long, 13 ft wide, and 16 ft deep. This
mass, containing above 4,800 cubic feet, and weighing about 400
tons, was blasted three times. Two charges of 50 lbs each were
successively exploded in a hole 13 feet deep, the bore being 3
inches at top and 2 1/2 inches at bottom: 100 lbs of powder were
afterwards exploded in the rent formed by those operations. Each
pound of gunpowder separated from the rock two tons of matter, or
nearly 4,500 times its own weight. The expense of the powder was
L 6, or nearly 7 1/2d. per lb: the boring occupied two men during
a day and a half, and cost about 9s.; and the value of the
produce was, at that time, about L 45.

7. The simple contrivance of tin tubes for speaking through,
communicating between different apartments, by which the
directions of the superintendent are instantly conveyed to the
remotest parts of an establishment, produces a considerable
economy of time. It is employed in the shops and manufactories in
London, and might with advantage be used in domestic
establishments, particularly in large houses, in conveying orders
from the nursery to the kitchen, or from the house to the stable.
Its convenience arises not merely from saving the servant or
workman useless journeys to receive directions, but from
relieving the master himself from that indisposition to give
trouble, which frequently induces him to forego a trifling want,
when he knows that his attendant must mount several flights of
stairs to ascertain his wishes, and, after descending, must mount
again to supply them. The distance to which such a mode of
communication can be extended, does not appear to have been
ascertained, and would be an interesting subject for enquiry.
Admitting it to be possible between London and Liverpool, about
seventeen minutes would elapse before the words spoken at one end
would reach the other extremity of the pipe.

8. The art of using the diamond for cutting glass has
undergone, within a few years, a very important improvement. A
glazier's apprentice, when using a diamond set in a conical
ferrule, as was always the practice about twenty years since,
found great difficulty in acquiring the art of using it with
certainty; and, at the end of a seven years' apprenticeship, many
were found but indifferently skilled in its employment. This
arose from the difficulty of finding the precise angle at which
the diamond cuts, and of guiding it along the glass at the proper
inclination when that angle is found. Almost the whole of the
time consumed and of the glass destroyed in acquiring the art of
cutting glass, may now be saved by the use of an improved tool.
The gem is set in a small piece of squared brass with its edges
nearly parallel to one side of the square. A person skilled in
its use now files away the brass on one side until, by trial, he
finds that the diamond will make a clean cut, when guided by
keeping this edge pressed against a ruler. The diamond and its
mounting are now attached to a stick like a pencil, by means of a
swivel allowing a small angular motion. Thus, even the beginner
at once applies the cutting edge at the proper angle, by pressing
the side of the brass against a ruler; and even though the part
he holds in his hand should deviate a little from the required
angle, it communicates no irregularity to the position of the
diamond, which rarely fails to do its office when thus employed.

The relative hardness of the diamond, in different
directions, is a singular fact. An experienced workman, on whose
judgement I can rely, informed me that he has seen a diamond
ground with diamond powder on a cast-iron mill for three hours
without its being at all worn, but that, on changing its
direction with respect to the grinding surface, the same edge was
ground away.

9. Employment of materials of little value. The skins used by
the goldbeater are produced from the offal of animals. The hoofs
of horses and cattle, and other horny refuse, are employed in the
production of the prussiate of potash, that beautiful, yellow,
crystallized salt, which is exhibited in the shops of some of our
chemists. The worn-out saucepans and tinware of our kitchens,
when beyond the reach of the tinker's art, are not utterly
worthless. We sometimes meet carts loaded with old tin kettles
and worn-out iron coal-skuttles traversing our streets. These
have not yet completed their useful course; the less corroded
parts are cut into strips, punched with small holes, and
varnished with a coarse black varnish for the use of the
trunk-maker, who protects the edges and angles of his boxes with
them; the remainder are conveyed to the manufacturing chemists in
the outskirts of the town, who employ them in combination with
pyroligneous acid, in making a black die for the use of calico
printers.

10. Of tools. The difference between a tool and a machine is
not capable of very precise distinction; nor is it necessary, in
a popular explanation of those terms, to limit very strictly
their acceptation. A tool is usually more simple than a machine;
it is generally used with the hand, whilst a machine is
frequently moved by animal or steam power. The simpler machines
are often merely one or more tools placed in a frame, and acted
on by a moving power. In pointing out the advantages of tools, we
shall commence with some of the simplest.

11. To arrange twenty thousand needles thrown promiscuously
into a box, mixed and entangled in every possible direction, in
such a form that they shall be all parallel to each other, would,
at first sight, appear a most tedious occupation; in fact, if
each needle were to be separated individually, many hours must be
consumed in the process. Yet this is an operation which must be
performed many times in the manufacture of needles; and it is
accomplished in a few minutes by a very simple tool; nothing more
being requisite than a small flat tray of sheet iron, slightly
concave at the bottom. In this the needles are placed, and shaken
in a peculiar manner, by throwing them up a very little, and
giving at the same time a slight longitudinal motion to the tray.
The shape of the needles assists their arrangement; for if two
needles cross each other (unless, which is exceedingly
improbable, they happen to be precisely balanced), they will,
when they fall on the bottom of the tray, tend to place
themselves side by side, and the hollow form of the tray assists
this disposition. As they have no projection in any part to
impede this tendency, or to entangle each other, they are, by
continually shaking, arranged lengthwise, in three or four
minutes. The direction of the shake is now changed, the needles
are but little thrown up, but the tray is shaken endways; the
result of which is, that in a minute or two the needles which
were previously arranged endways become heaped up in a wall, with
their ends against the extremity of the tray. They are then
removed, by hundreds at a time, with a broad iron spatula, on
which they are retained by the forefinger of the left hand. As
this parallel arrangement of the needles must be repeated many
times, if a cheap and expeditious method had not been devised,
the expense of the manufacture would have been considerably
enhanced.

12. Another process in the art of making needles furnishes an
example of one of the simplest contrivances which can come under
the denomination of a tool. After the needles have been arranged
in the manner just described, it is necessary to separate them
into two parcels, in order that their points may be all in one
direction. This is usually done by women and children. The
needles are placed sideways in a heap, on a table, in front of
each operator, just as they are arranged by the process above
described. From five to ten are rolled towards this person with
the forefinger of the left hand; this separates them a very small
space from each other, and each in its turn is pushed lengthwise
to the right or to the left, according to the direction of the
point. This is the usual process, and in it every needle passes
individually under the finger of the operator. A small alteration
expedites the process considerably: the child puts on the
forefinger of its right hand a small cloth cap or fingerstall,
and rolling out of the heap from six to twelve needles, he keeps
them down by the forefinger of the left hand, whilst he presses
the forefinger of the right hand gently against their ends: those
which have the points towards the right hand stick into the
fingerstall; and the child, removing the finger of the left hand,
slightly raises the needles sticking into the cloth, and then
pushes them towards the left side. Those needles which had their
eyes on the right hand do not stick into the finger cover, and
are pushed to the heap on the right side before the repetition of
this process. By means of this simple contrivance each movement
of the finger, from one side to the other, carries five or six
needles to their proper heap; whereas, in the former method,
frequently only one was moved, and rarely more than two or three
were transported at one movement to their place.

13. Various operations occur in the arts in which the
assistance of an additional hand would be a great convenience to
the workman, and in these cases tools or machines of the simplest
structure come to our aid: vices of different forms, in which the
material to be wrought is firmly grasped by screws, are of this
kind, and are used in almost every workshop; but a more striking
example may be found in the trade of the nail-maker.

Some kinds of nails, such as those used for defending the
soles of coarse shoes, called hobnails, require a particular form
of the head, which is made by the stroke of a die. The workman
holds one end of the rod of iron out of which he forms the nails
in his left hand; with his right hand he hammers the red-hot end
of it into a point, and cutting the proper length almost off,
bends it nearly at a right angle. He puts this into a hole in a
small stake-iron immediately under a hammer which is connected
with a treadle, and has a die sunk in its surface corresponding
to the intended form of the head; and having given one part of
the form to the head with the small hammer in his hand, he moves
the treadle with his foot, disengages the other hammer, and
completes the figure of the head; the returning stroke produced
by the movement of the treadle striking the finished nail out of
the hole in which it was retained. Without this substitution of
his foot for another hand, the workman would, probably, be
obliged to heat the nails twice over.

14. Another, though fortunately a less general substitution
of tools for human hands, is used to assist the labour of those
who are deprived by nature, or by accident, of some of their
limbs. Those who have had an opportunity of examining the
beautiful contrivances for the manufacture of shoes by machinery,
which we owe to the fertile invention of Mr Brunel, must have
noticed many instances in which the workmen were enabled to
execute their task with precision, although labouring under the
disadvantages of the loss of an arm or leg. A similar instance
occurs at Liverpool, in the Institution for the Blind, where a
machine is used by those afflicted with blindness, for weaving
sash-lines; it is said to have been the invention of a person
suffering under that calamity. Other examples might be mentioned
of contrivances for the use, the amusement, or the instruction of
the wealthier classes, who labour under the same natural
disadvantages. These triumphs of skill and ingenuity deserve a
double portion of our admiration when applied to mitigate the
severity of natural or accidental misfortune; when they supply
the rich with occupation and knowledge; when they relieve the
poor from the additional evils of poverty and want.

15. Division of the objects of machinery. There exists a
natural, although, in point of number, a very unequal division
amongst machines: they may be classed as; first, those which are
employed to produce power, and as, secondly, those which are
intended merely to transmit force and execute work. The first of
these divisions is of great importance, and is very limited in
the variety of its species, although some of those species
consist of numerous individuals.

Of that class of mechanical agents by which motion is
transmitted--the lever, the pulley, the wedge, and many others--
it has been demonstrated, that no power is gained by their use,
however combined. Whatever force is applied at one point can only
be exerted at some other, diminished by friction and other
incidental causes; and it has been further proved, that whatever
is gained in the rapidity of execution is compensated by the
necessity of exerting additional force. These two principles,
long since placed beyond the reach of doubt, cannot be too
constantly borne in mind. But in limiting our attempts to things
which are possible, we are still, as we hope to shew, possessed
of a field of inexhaustible research, and of advantages derived
from mechanical skill, which have but just begun to exercise
their influence on our arts, and may be pursued without limit
contributing to the improvement, the wealth, and the happiness of
our race.

16. Of those machines by which we produce power, it may be
observed, that although they are to us immense acquisitions, yet
in regard to two of the sources of this power--the force of wind
and of water--we merely make use of bodies in a state of motion
by nature; we change the directions of their movement in order to
render them subservient to our purposes, but we neither add to
nor diminish the quantity of motion in existence. When we expose
the sails of a windmill obliquely to the gale, we check the
velocity of a small portion of the atmosphere, and convert its
own rectilinear motion into one of rotation in the sails; we thus
change the direction of force, but we create no power. The same
may be observed with regard to the sails of a vessel; the
quantity of motion given by them is precisely the same as that
which is destroyed in the atmosphere. If we avail ourselves of a
descending stream to turn a water-wheel, we are appropriating a
power which nature may appear, at first sight, to be uselessly
and irrecoverably wasting, but which, upon due examination, we
shall find she is ever regaining by other processes. The fluid
which is falling from a higher to a lower level, carries with it
the velocity due to its revolution with the earth at a greater
distance from its centre. It will therefore accelerate, although
to an almost infinitesimal extent, the earth's daily rotation.
The sum of all these increments of velocity, arising from the
descent of all the falling waters on the earth's surface, would
in time become perceptible, did not nature, by the process of
evaporation, convey the waters back to their sources; and thus
again, by removing matter to a greater distance from the centre,
destroy the velocity generated by its previous approach.

17. The force of vapour is another fertile source of moving
power; but even in this case it cannot be maintained that power
is created. Water is converted into elastic vapour by the
combustion of fuel. The chemical changes which thus take place
are constantly increasing the atmosphere by large quantities of
carbonic acid and other gases noxious to animal life. The means
by which nature decomposes these elements, or reconverts them
into a solid form, are not sufficiently known: but if the end
could be accomplished by mechanical force, it is almost certain
that the power necessary to produce it would at least equal that
which was generated by the original combustion. Man, therefore,
does not create power; but, availing himself of his knowledge of
nature's mysteries, he applies his talents to diverting a small
and limited portion of her energies to his own wants: and,
whether he employs the regulated action of steam, or the more
rapid and tremendous effects of gunpowder, he is only producing
on a small scale compositions and decompositions which nature is
incessantly at work in reversing, for the restoration of that
equilibrium which we cannot doubt is constantly maintained
throughout even the remotest limits of our system. The operations
of man participate in the character of their author; they are
diminutive, but energetic during the short period of their
existence: whilst those of nature, acting over vast spaces, and
unlimited by time, are ever pursuing their silent and resistless
career.

18. In stating the broad principle, that all combinations of
mechanical art can only augment the force communicated to the
machine at the expense of the time employed in producing the
effect, it might, perhaps, be imagined, that the assistance
derived from such contrivances is small. This is, however, by no
means the case: since the almost unlimited variety they afford,
enables us to exert to the greatest advantage whatever force we
employ. There is, it is true, a limit beyond which it is
impossible to reduce the power necessary to produce any given
effect, but it very seldom happens that the methods first
employed at all approach that limit. In dividing the knotted root
of a tree for fuel, how very different will be the time consumed,
according to the nature of the tool made use of! The hatchet, or
the adze, will divide it into small parts, but will consume a
large portion of the workman's time. The saw will answer the same
purpose more quickly and more effectually. This, in its turn, is
superseded by the wedge, which rends it in a still shorter time.
If the circumstances are favourable, and the workman skilful, the
time and expense may be still further reduced by the use of a
small quantity of gunpowder exploded in holes judiciously placed
in the block.

19. When a mass of matter is to be removed a certain force
must be expended; and upon the proper economy of this force the
price of transport will depend. A country must, however, have
reached a high degree of civilization before it will have
approached the limit of this economy. The cotton of Java is
conveyed in junks to the coast of China; but from the seed not
being previously separated, three-quarters of the weight thus
carried is not cotton. This might, perhaps, be justified in Java
by the want of machinery to separate the seed, or by the relative
cost of the operation in the two countries. But the cotton
itself, as packed by the Chinese, occupies three times the bulk
of an equal quantity shipped by Europeans for their own markets.
Thus the freight of a given quantity of cotton costs the Chinese
nearly twelve times the price to which, by a proper attention to
mechanical methods, it might be reduced. *

NOTES:

1. 'The Bandana handkerchiefs manufactured at Glasgow have long
superseded the genuine ones, and are now consumed in large
quantities both by the natives and Chinese.' Crawford's Indian
Archipelago, vol. iii, p. 505.

2. 'Captain Clapperton, when on a visit at the court of the
Sultan Bello, states, that 'provisions were regularly sent me from
the sultan's table on pewter dishes with the London stamp; and I
even had a piece of meat served up on a white wash-hand basin of
English manufacture.' Clapperton's Journey, p. 88.

3. At Calicut, in the East Indies (whence the cotton cloth called
calico derives its name), the price of labour is one-seventh of
that in England, yet the market is supplied from British looms.

4. Liverpool, though not itself a manufacturing town, has been
placed in this list, from its connection with Manchester, of
which it is the port.

5. So sensible are the effects of grease in diminishing friction,
that the drivers of sledges in Amsterdam, on which heavy goods are
transported, carry in their hand a rope soaked in tallow, which
they throw down from time to time before the sledge, in order
that, by passing over the rope, it may become greased.



Chapter 2

Accumulating Power

20. Whenever the work to be done requires more force for its
execution than can be generated in the time necessary for its
completion, recourse must be had to some mechanical method of
preserving and condensing a part of the power exerted previously
to the commencement of the process. This is most frequently
accomplished by a fly-wheel, which is in fact nothing more than a
wheel having a very heavy rim, so that the greater part of its
weight is near the circumference. It requires great power applied
for some time to put this into rapid motion; but when moving with
considerable velocity, the effects are exceedingly powerful, if
its force be concentrated upon a small object. In some of the
iron works where the power of the steam-engine is a little too
small for the rollers which it drives, it is usual to set the
engine at work a short time before the red-hot iron is ready to
be removed from the furnace to the rollers, and to allow it to
work with great rapidity until the fly has acquired a velocity
rather alarming to those unused to such establishments. On
passing the softened mass of iron through the first groove, the
engine receives a great and very perceptible check; and its speed
is diminished at the next and at each succeeding passage, until
the iron bar is reduced to such a size that the ordinary power of
the engine is sufficient to roll it.

21. The powerful effect of a large flywheel when its force
can be concentrated on a point, was curiously illustrated at one
of the largest of our manufactories. The proprietor was shewing
to a friend the method of punching holes in iron plates for the
boilers of steam-engines. He held in his hand a piece of
sheet-iron three-eighths of an inch thick, which he placed under
the punch. Observing, after several holes had been made, that the
punch made its perforations more and more slowly, he called to
the engine-man to know what made the engine work so sluggishly,
when it was found that the flywheel and punching apparatus had
been detached from the steam-engine just at the commencement of
his experiment.

22. Another mode of accumulating power arises from lifting a
weight and then allowing it to fall. A man, even with a heavy
hammer, might strike repeated blows upon the head of a pile
without producing any effect. But if he raises a much heavier
hammer to a much greater height, its fall, though far less
frequently repeated, will produce the desired effect.

When a small blow is given to a large mass of matter, as to a
pile, the imperfect elasticity of the material causes a small
loss of momentum in the transmission of the motion from each
particle to the succeeding one; and, therefore, it may happen
that the whole force communicated shall be destroyed before it
reaches the opposite extremity.

23. The power accumulated within a small space by gunpowder
is well known; and, though not strictly an illustration of the
subject discussed in this chapter, some of its effects, under
peculiar circumstances, are so singular, that an attempt to
explain them may perhaps be excused. If a gun is loaded with ball
it will not kick so much as when loaded with small shot; and
amongst different kinds of shot, that which is the smallest,
causes the greatest recoil against the shoulder. A gun loaded
with a quantity of sand, equal in weight to a charge of
snipe-shot, kicks still more. If, in loading, a space is left
between the wadding and the charge, the gun either recoils
violently, or bursts. If the muzzle of a gun has accidentally
been stuck into the ground, so as to be stopped up with clay, or
even with snow, or if it be fired with its muzzle plunged into
water, the almost certain result is that it bursts.

The ultimate cause of these apparently inconsistent effects
is, that every force requires time to produce its effect; and if
the time requisite for the elastic vapour within to force out the
sides of the barrel, is less than that in which the condensation
of the air near the wadding is conveyed in sufficient force to
drive the impediment from the muzzle, then the barrel must burst.
If sometimes happens that these two forces are so nearly balanced
that the barrel only swells; the obstacle giving way before the
gun is actually burst.

The correctness of this explanation will appear by tracing
step by step the circumstances which arise on discharging a gun
loaded with powder confined by a cylindrical piece of wadding,
and having its muzzle filled with clay, or some other substance
having a moderate degree of resistance. In this case the first
effect of the explosion is to produce an enormous pressure on
everything confining it, and to advance the wadding through a
very small space. Here let us consider it as at rest for a
moment, and examine its condition. The portion of air in
immediate contact with the wadding is condensed; and if the
wadding were to remain at rest, the air throughout the tube would
soon acquire a uniform density. But this would require a small
interval of time; for the condensation next the wadding would
travel with the velocity of sound to the other end, from whence,
being reflected back, a series of waves would be generated,
which, aided by the friction of the tube, would ultimately
destroy the motion.

But until the first wave reaches the impediment at the
muzzle, the air can exert no pressure against it. Now if the
velocity communicated to the wadding is very much greater than
that of sound, the condensation of the air immediately in advance
of it may be very great before the resistance transmitted to the
muzzle is at all considerable; in which case the mutual repulsion
of the particles of air so compressed, will offer an absolute
barrier to the advance of the wadding.(1*)

If this explanation be correct, the additional recoil, when a
gun is loaded with small shot or sand, may arise in some measure
from the condensation of the air contained between their
particles; but chiefly from the velocity communicated by the
explosion to those particles of the substances in immediate
contact with the powder being greater than that with which a wave
can be transmitted through them. It also affords a reason for the
success of a method of blasting rocks by filling the upper part
of the hole above the powder with sand, instead of clay rammed
hard. That the destruction of the gun barrel does not arise from
the property possessed by fluids, and in some measure also by
sand and small shot, of pressing equally in all directions, and
thus exerting a force against a large portion of the interior
surface, seems to be proved by a circumstance mentioned by Le
Vaillant and other travellers, that, for the purpose of taking
birds without injuring their plumage, they filled the barrel of
their fowling pieces with water, instead of loading them with a
charge of shot.

24. The same reasoning explains a curious phenomenon which
occurs in firing a still more powerfully explosive substance. If
we put a small quantity of fulminating silver upon the face of an
anvil, and strike it slightly with a hammer, it explodes; but
instead of breaking either the hammer or the anvil, it is found
that that part of the face of each in contact with the
fulminating silver is damaged. In this case the velocity
communicated by the elastic matter disengaged may be greater than
the velocity of a wave traversing steel; so that the particles at
the surface are driven by the explosion so near to those next
adjacent, that when the compelling force is removed, the
repulsion of the particles within the mass drives back those
nearer to the surface, with such force, that they pass beyond the
limits of attraction, and are separated in the shape of powder.

25. i) The success of the experiment of firing a tallow candle
through a deal board, would be explained in the same manner, by
supposing the velocity of a wave propagated through deal to be
greater than that of a wave passing through tallow.

25. ii) The boiler of a steam-engine sometimes bursts even
during the escape of steam through the safety-valve. If the water
in the boiler is thrown upon any part which happens to be red
hot, the steam formed in the immediate neighbourhood of that part
expands with greater velocity than that with which a wave can be
transmitted through the less heated steam; consequently one
particle is urged against the next, and an almost invincible
obstacle is formed, in the same manner as described in the case
of the discharge of a gun. If the safety-valve is closed, it may
retain the pressure thus created for a short time, and even when
it is open the escape may not be sufficiently rapid to remove all
impediment; there may therefore exist momentarily within the
boiler pressures of various force, varying from that which can
just lift the safety-valve up to that which is sufficient, if
exerted during an extremely small space of time, to tear open the
boiler itself.

26. This reasoning ought, however, to be admitted with
caution; and perhaps some inducement to examine it carefully may
be presented by tracing it to extreme cases. It would seem, but
this is not a necessary consequence, that a gun might be made so
long, that it would burst although no obstacle filled up its
muzzle. It should also follow that if, after the gun is charged,
the air were extracted from the barrel, though the muzzle be then
left closed, the gun ought not to burst. It would also seem to
follow from the principle of the explanation, that a body might
be projected in air, or other elastic resisting medium, with such
force that, after advancing a very short space it should return
in the same direction in which it was projected.

NOTES:

1. See Poisson's remarks, Ecole Polytec. Cahier, xxi, p. 191.



Chapter 3

Regulating Power

27. Uniformity and steadiness in the rate at which machinery
works, are essential both for its effect and its duration. The
first illustration which presents itself is that beautiful
contrivance, the governor of the steam-engine, which must
immediately occur to all who are familiar with that admirable
engine. Wherever the increased speed of the engine would lead to
injurious or dangerous consequences, this is applied; and it is
equally the regulator of the water-wheel which drives a
spinning-jenny, or of the windmills which drain our fens. In the
dockyard at Chatham, the descending motion of a large platform,
on which timber is raised, is regulated by a governor; but as the
weight is very considerable, the velocity of this governor is
still further checked by causing its motion to take place in
water.

28. Another very beautiful contrivance for regulating the
number of strokes made by a steam-engine, is used in Cornwall: it
is called the cataract, and depends on the time required to fill
a vessel plunged in water, the opening of the valve through which
the fluid is admitted being adjustable at the will of the
engine-man.

29. The regularity of the supply of fuel to the fire under
the boilers of steam-engines is another mode of contributing to
the uniformity of their rate, and also economizes the consumption
of coal. Several patents have been taken out for methods of
regulating this supply: the general principle being to make the
engine supply the fire with small quantities of fuel at regular
intervals by means of a hopper, and to make it diminish this
supply when the engine works too quickly. One of the incidental
advantages of this plan is, that by throwing on a very small
quantity of coal at a time, the smoke is almost entirely
consumed. The dampers of ashpits and chimneys are also, in some
cases, connected with machines in order to regulate their speed.

30. Another contrivance for regulating the effect of
machinery consists in a vane or fly, of little weight, but
presenting a large surface. This revolves rapidly, and soon
acquires a uniform rate, which it cannot greatly exceed, because
any addition to its velocity produces a much greater addition to
the resistance it meets with from the air. The interval between
the strokes on the bell of a clock is regulated in this way, and
the fly is so contrived, that the interval may be altered by
presenting the arms of it more or less obliquely to the direction
in which they move. This kind of fly, or vane, is generally used
in the smaller kinds of mechanism, and, unlike the heavy fly, it
is a destroyer instead of a preserver of force. It is the
regulator used in musical boxes, and in almost all mechanical
toys.

31. The action of a fly, or vane, suggests the principle of
an instrument for measuring the altitude of mountains, which
perhaps deserves a trial, since, if it succeed only tolerably, it
will form a much more portable instrument than the barometer. It
is well known that the barometer indicates the weight of a column
of the atmosphere above it, whose base is equal to the bore of
the tube. It is also known that the density of the air adjacent
to the instrument will depend both on the weight of air above it,
and on the heat of the air at that place. If, therefore, we can
measure the density of the air, and its temperature, the height
of a column of mercury which it would support in the barometer
can be found by calculation. Now the thermometer gives
information respecting the temperature of the air immediately;
and its density might be ascertained by means of a watch and a
small instrument, in which the number of turns made by a vane
moved by a constant force, should be registered. The less dense
the air in which the vane revolves, the greater will be the
number of its revolutions in a given time: and tables could be
formed from experiments in partially exhausted vessels, aided by
calculation, from which, if the temperature of the air, and the
number of revolutions of the vane are given, the corresponding
height of the barometer might be found.(1*)

NOTES:

1. To persons who may be inclined to experiment upon this or any
other instrument, I would beg to suggest the perusal of the
section 'On the art of Observing', Observations on the Decline of
Science in England, p. 170, Fellowes, 1828.



Chapter 4

Increase and Diminution of Velocity

32. The fatigue produced on the muscles of the human frame
does not altogether depend on the actual force employed in each
effort, but partly on the frequency with which it is exerted. The
exertion necessary to accomplish every operation consists of two
parts: one of these is the expenditure of force which is
necessary to drive the tool or instrument; and the other is the
effort required for the motion of some limb of the animal
producing the action. In driving a nail into a piece of wood, one
of these is lifting the hammer, and propelling its head against
the nail; the other is, raising the arm itself, and moving it in
order to use the hammer. If the weight of the hammer is
considerable, the former part will cause the greatest portion of
the exertion. If the hammer is light, the exertion of raising the
arm will produce the greatest part of the fatigue. It does
therefore happen, that operations requiring very trifling force,
if frequently repeated, will tire more effectually than more
laborious work. There is also a degree of rapidity beyond which
the action of the muscles cannot be pressed.

33. The most advantageous load for a porter who carries wood
up stairs on his shoulders, has been investigated by M. Coulomb;
but he found from experiment that a man walking up stairs without
any load, and raising his burden by means of his own weight in
descending, could do as much work in one day, as four men
employed in the ordinary way with the most favourable load.

34. The proportion between the velocity with which men or
animals move, and the weights they carry, is a matter of
considerable importance, particularly in military affairs. It is
also of great importance for the economy of labour, to adjust the
weight of that part of the animal's body which is moved, the
weight of the tool it urges, and the frequency of repetition of
these efforts, so as to produce the greatest effect. An instance
of the saving of time by making the same motion of the arm
execute two operations instead of one, occurs in the simple art
of making the tags of bootlaces: these tags are formed out of
very thin, tinned, sheet-iron, and were formerly cut out of long
strips of that material into pieces of such a breadth that when
bent round they just enclosed the lace. Two pieces of steel have
recently been fixed to the side of the shears, by which each
piece of tinned-iron as soon as it is cut is bent into a
semi-cylindrical form. The additional power required for this
operation is almost imperceptible, and it is executed by the same
motion of the arm which produces the cut. The work is usually
performed by women and children; and with the improved tool more
than three times the quantity of tags is produced in a given
time.(1*)

35. Whenever the work is itself light, it becomes necessary,
in order to economize time, to increase the velocity. Twisting
the fibres of wool by the fingers would be a most tedious
operation: in the common spinning-wheel the velocity of the foot
is moderate, but by a very simple contrivance that of the thread
is most rapid. A piece of catgut passing round a large wheel, and
then round a small spindle, effects this change. This contrivance
is common to a multitude of machines, some of them very simple.
In large shops for the retail of ribands, it is necessary at
short intervals to 'take stock', that is, to measure and rewind
every piece of riband, an operation which, even with this mode of
shortening it, is sufficiently tiresome, but without it would be
almost impossible from its expense. The small balls of sewing
cotton, so cheap and so beautifully wound, are formed by a
machine on the same principle, and but a few steps more
complicated.

36. In turning from the smaller instruments in frequent use
to the larger and more important machines, the economy arising
from the increase of velocity becomes more striking. In
converting cast into wrought-iron, a mass of metal, of about a
hundredweight, is heated almost to white heat, and placed under a
heavy hammer moved by water or steam power. This is raised by a
projection on a revolving axis; and if the hammer derived its
momentum only from the space through which it fell, it would
require a considerably greater time to give a blow. But as it is
important that the softened mass of red-hot iron should receive
as many blows as possible before it cools, the form of the cam or
projection on the axis is such, that the hammer, instead of being
lifted to a small height, is thrown up with a jerk, and almost
the instant after it strikes against a large beam, which acts as
a powerful spring, and drives it down on the iron with such
velocity that by these means about double the number of strokes
can be made in a given time. In the smaller tilt-hammers, this is
carried still further by striking the tail of the tilt-hammer
forcibly against a small steel anvil, it rebounds with such
velocity, that from three to five hundred strokes are made in a
minute. In the manufacture of anchors, an art in which a similar
contrivance is of still greater importance, it has only been
recently applied.

37. In the manufacture of scythes, the length of the blade
renders it necessary that the workman should move readily, so as
to bring every part of it on the anvil in quick succession. This
is effected by placing him in a seat suspended by ropes from the
ceiling: so that he is enabled, with little bodily exertion, to
vary his distance, by pressing his feet against the block which
supports the anvil, or against the floor.

38. An increase of velocity is sometimes necessary to render
operations possible: thus a person may skate with great rapidity
over ice which would not support his weight if he moved over it
more slowly. This arises from the fact, that time is requisite
for producing the fracture of the ice: as soon as the weight of
the skater begins to act on any point, the ice, supported by the
water, bends slowly under him; but if the skater's velocity is
considerable, he has passed off from the spot which was loaded
before the bending has reached the point which would cause the
ice to break.

39. An effect not very different from this might take place
if very great velocity were communicated to boats. Let us suppose
a flatbottomed boat, whose bow forms an inclined plane with the
bottom, at rest in still water. If we imagine some very great
force suddenly to propel this boat, the inclination of the plane
at the forepart would cause it to rise in the water; and if the
force were excessive, it might even rise out of the water, and
advance, by a series of leaps, like a piece of slate or an oyster
shell, thrown as a 'duck and drake'.

If the force were not sufficient to pull the boat out of the
water, but were just enough to bring its bottom to the surface,
it would be carried along with a kind of gliding motion with
great rapidity; for at every point of its course it would require
a certain time before, it could sink to its usual draft of water;
but before that time had elapsed, it would have advanced to
another point, and consequently have been raised by the reaction
of the water on the inclined plane at its forepart.

40. The same fact, that bodies moving with great velocity
have not time to exert the full effect of their weight, seems to
explain a circumstance which appears to be very unaccountable. It
sometimes happens that when foot-passengers are knocked down by
carriages, the wheels pass over them with scarcely any injury,
though, if the weight of the carriage had rested on their body,
even for a few seconds, it would have crushed them to death. If
the view above taken is correct, the injury in such circumstances
will chiefly happen to that part of the body which is struck by
the advancing wheel.

41. An operation in which rapidity is of essential importance
is in bringing the produce of mines up to the surface. The shafts
through which the produce is raised are sunk at a very great
expense, and it is, of course, desirable to sink as few of them
as possible. The matter to be extracted is therefore raised by
steam-engines with considerable velocity, and without this many of our
mines could not be worked with profit.

42. The effect of great velocity in modifying the form of a
cohesive substance is beautifully shown in the process for making
window glass, termed "flashing", which is one of the most striking
operations in our domestic arts. A workman having dipped his iron
tube into the glass pot, and loaded it with several pounds of the
melted "metal", blows out a large globe, which is connected with
his rod by a short thick hollow neck. Another workman now fixes
to the globe immediately opposite to its neck, an iron rod, the
extremity of which has been dipped in the melted glass; and when
this is firmly attached, a few drops of water separate the neck
of the globe from the iron tube. The rod with the globe attached
to it is now held at the mouth of a glowing furnace: and by
turning the rod the globe is made to revolve slowly, so as to be
uniformly exposed to the heat: the first effect of this softening
is to make the glass contract upon itself and to enlarge the
opening of the neck. As the softening proceeds, the globe is
turned more quickly on its axis, and when very soft and almost
incandescent, it is removed from the fire, and the velocity of
rotation being still continually increased, the opening enlarges
from the effect of the centrifugal force, at first gradually,
until at last the mouth suddenly expands or "flashes" out into one
large circular sheet of red hot glass. The neck of the original
globe, which is to become the outer part of the sheet, is left
thick to admit of this expansion, and forms the edge of the
circular plate of glass, which is called a "Table". The centre
presents the appearance of a thick boss or prominence, called the
"Bull's-eye", at the part by which it was attached to the iron
rod.

43. The most frequent reason for employing contrivances for
diminishing velocity, arises from the necessity of overcoming
great resistances with small power. Systems of pulleys, the
crane, and many other illustrations, might also be adduced here
as examples; but they belong more appropriately to some of the
other causes which we have assigned for the advantages of
machinery. The common smoke-jack is an instrument in which the
velocity communicated is too great for the purpose required, and
it is transmitted through wheels which reduce it to a more
moderate rate.

44. Telegraphs are machines for conveying information over
extensive lines with great rapidity. They have generally been
established for the purposes of transmitting information during
war, but the increasing wants of man will probably soon render
them subservient to more peaceful objects.

A few years since the telegraph conveyed to Paris information
of the discovery of a comet, by M. Gambart, at Marseilles: the
message arrived during a sitting of the French Board of
Longitude, and was sent in a note from the Minister of the
Interior to Laplace, the President, who received it whilst the
writer of these lines was sitting by his side. The object in this
instance was, to give the earliest publicity to the fact, and to
assure to M. Gambart the title of its first discoverer.

At Liverpool a system of signals is established for the
purposes of commerce, so that each merchant can communicate with
his own vessel long before she arrives in the port.

NOTES:

1. See Transactions of the Society of Arts, 1826.



Chapter 5

Extending the Time of Action of Forces

45. This is one of the most common and most useful of the
employments of machinery. The half minute which we daily devote
to the winding-up of our watches is an exertion of labour almost
insensible; yet, by the aid of a few wheels, its effect is spread
over the whole twenty-four hours. In our clocks, this extension
of the time of action of the original force impressed is carried
still further; the better kind usually require winding up once in
eight days, and some are occasionally made to continue in action
during a month, or even a year. Another familiar illustration may
be noticed in our domestic furniture: the common jack by which
our meat is roasted, is a contrivance to enable the cook in a few
minutes to exert a force which the machine retails out during the
succeeding hour in turning the loaded spit; thus enabling her to
bestow her undivided attention on the other important duties of
her vocation. A great number of automatons and mechanical toys
moved by springs, may be classed under this division.

46. A small moving power, in the shape of a jack or a spring
with a train of wheels, is often of great convenience to the
experimental philosopher, and has been used with advantage in
magnetic and electric experiments where the rotation of a disk of
metal or other body is necessary, thus allowing to the enquirer
the unimpeded use of both his hands. A vane connected by a train
of wheels, and set in motion by a heavy weight, has also, on some
occasions, been employed in chemical processes, to keep a
solution in a state of agitation. Another object to which a
similar apparatus may be applied, is the polishing of small
specimens of minerals for optical experiments.



Chapter 6

Saving time in Natural Operations

47. The process of tanning will furnish us with a striking
illustration of the power of machinery in accelerating certain
processes in which natural operations have a principal effect.
The object of this art is to combine a certain principle called
tanning with every particle of the skin to be tanned. This, in
the ordinary process, is accomplished by allowing the skins to
soak in pits containing a solution of tanning matter: they remain
in the pits six, twelve, or eighteen months; and in some
instances (if the hides are very thick), they are exposed to the
operation for two years, or even during a longer period. This
length of time is apparently required in order to allow the
tanning matter to penetrate into the interior of a thick hide.
The improved process consists in placing the hides with the
solution of tan in close vessels, and then exhausting the air.
The effect is to withdraw any air which may be contained in the
pores of the hides, and to aid capillary attraction by the
pressure of the atmosphere in forcing the tan into the interior
of the skins. The effect of the additional force thus brought
into action can be equal only to one atmosphere, but a further
improvement has been made: the vessel containing the hides is,
after exhaustion, filled up with a solution of tan; a small
additional quantity is then injected with a forcing-pump. By
these means any degree of pressure may be given which the
containing vessel is capable of supporting; and it has been found
that, by employing such a method, the thickest hides may be
tanned in six weeks or two months.

48. The same process of injection might be applied to
impregnate timber with tar, or any other substance capable of
preserving it from decay, and if it were not too expensive, the
deal floors of houses might thus be impregnated with alumine or
other substances, which would render them much less liable to be
accidentally set on fire. In some cases it might be useful to
impregnate woods with resins, varnish, or oil; and wood saturated
with oil might, in some instances, be usefully employed in
machinery for giving a constant, but very minute supply of that
fluid to iron or steel, against which it is worked. Some idea of
the quantity of matter which can be injected into wood by great
pressure, may be formed, from considering the fact stated by Mr
Scoresby, respecting an accident which occurred to a boat of one
of our whaling-ships. The harpoon having been struck into the
fish, the whale in this instance, dived directly down, and
carried the boat along with him. On returning to the surface the
animal was killed, but the boat, instead of rising, was found
suspended beneath the whale by the rope of the harpoon; and on
drawing it up, every part of the wood was found to be so
completely saturated with water as to sink immediately to the
bottom.

49. The operation of bleaching linen in the open air is one
for which considerable time is necessary; and although it does
not require much labour, yet, from the risk of damage and of
robbery from long exposure, a mode of shortening the process was
highly desirable. The method now practised, although not
mechanical, is such a remarkable instance of the application of
science to the practical purposes of manufactures, that in
mentioning the advantages derived from shortening natural
operations, it would have been scarcely pardonable to have
omitted all allusion to the beautiful application of chlorine, in
combination with lime, to the art of bleaching.

50. Another instance more strictly mechanical occurs in some
countries where fuel is expensive, and the heat of the sun is not
sufficient to evaporate the water from brine springs. The water
is first pumped up to a reservoir, and then allowed to fall in
small streams through faggots. Thus it becomes divided; and,
presenting a large surface, evaporation is facilitated, and the.
brine which is collected in the vessels below the faggots is
stronger than that which was pumped up. After thus getting rid of
a large part of the water, the remaining portion is driven off by
boiling. The success of this process depends on the condition of
the atmosphere with respect to moisture. If the air, at the time
the brine falls through the faggots, holds in solution as much
moisture as it can contain in an invisible state, no more can be
absorbed from the salt water, and the labour expended in pumping
is entirely wasted. The state of the air, as to dryness, is
therefore an important consideration in fixing the time when this
operation is to be performed; and an attentive examination of its
state, by means of the hygrometer, might be productive of some
economy of labour.

51. In some countries, where wood is scarce, the evaporation
of salt water is carried on by a large collection of ropes which
are stretched perpendicularly. In passing down the ropes, the
water deposits the sulphate of lime which it held in solution,
and gradually incrusts them, so that in the course of twenty
years, when they are nearly rotten, they are still sustained by
the surrounding incrustation, thus presenting the appearance of a
vast collection of small columns.

52. Amongst natural operations perpetually altering the
surface of our globe, there are some which it would be
advantageous to accelerate. The wearing down of the rocks which
impede the rapids of navigable rivers, is one of this class. A
very beautiful process for accomplishing this object has been
employed in America. A boat is placed at the bottom of the rapid,
and kept in its position by a long rope which is firmly fixed on
the bank of the river near the top. An axis, having a wheel
similar to the paddle-wheel of a steamboat fixed at each end of
it, is placed across the boat; so that the two wheels and their
connecting axis shall revolve rapidly, being driven by the force
of the passing current. Let us now imagine several beams of wood
shod with pointed iron fixed at the ends of strong levers,
projecting beyond the bow of the boat, as in the annexed
representation.

If these levers are at liberty to move up and down, and if
one or more projecting pieces, called cams, are fixed on the axis
opposite to the end of each lever, the action of the stream upon
the wheels will keep up a perpetual succession of blows. The
sharp-pointed shoe striking upon the rock at the bottom, will
continually detach small pieces, which the stream will
immediately carry off. Thus, by the mere action of the river
itself, a constant and most effectual system of pounding the rock
at its bottom is established. A single workman may, by the aid of
a rudder, direct the boat to any required part of the stream; and
when it is necessary to move up the rapid, as the channel is cut,
he can easily cause the boat to advance by means of a capstan.

53. When the object of the machinery just described has been
accomplished, and the channel is sufficiently deep, a slight
alteration converts the apparatus to another purpose almost
equally advantageous. The stampers and the projecting pieces on
the axis are removed, and a barrel of wood or metal, surrounding
part of the axis, and capable, at pleasure, of being connected
with, or disconnected from the axis itself, is substituted. The
rope which hitherto fastened the boat, is now fixed to this
barrel; and if the barrel is loose upon the axis, the
paddle-wheel makes the axis only revolve, and the boat remains in
its place: but the moment the axis is attached to its surrounding
barrel, this begins to turn, and winding up the rope, the boat is
gradually drawn up against the stream; and may be employed as a
kind of tug-boat for vessels which have occasion to ascend the
rapid. When the tug-boat reaches the summit the barrel is
released from the axis, and friction being applied to moderate
its velocity, the boat is allowed to descend.

54. Clocks occupy a very high place amongst instruments by
means of which human time is economized: and their multiplication
in conspicuous places in large towns is attended with many
advantages. Their position, nevertheless, in London, is often
very ill chosen; and the usual place, halfway up on a high
steeple, in the midst of narrow streets, in a crowded city, is
very unfavourable, unless the church happen to stand out from the
houses which form the street. The most eligible situation for a
clock is, that it should project considerably into the street at
some elevation, with a dial-plate on each side, like that which
belonged to the old church of St Dunstan, in Fleet Street, so
that passengers in both directions would have their attention
directed to the hour.

55. A similar remark applies, with much greater force, to the
present defective mode of informing the public of the position of
the receiving houses for the twopenny and general post. In the
lowest corner of the window of some attractive shop is found a
small slit, with a brass plate indicating its important office so
obscurely that it seems to be an object rather to prevent its
being conspicuous. No striking sign assists the anxious enquirer,
who, as the moments rapidly pass which precede the hour of
closing, torments the passenger with his enquiries for the
nearest post-office. He reaches it, perhaps, just as it is
closed; and must then either hasten to a distant part of the town
in order to procure the admission of his letters or give up the
idea of forwarding them by that post; and thus, if they are
foreign letters, he may lose, perhaps, a week or a fortnight by
waiting for the next packet.

The inconvenience in this and in some other cases, is of
perpetual and everyday occurrence; and though, in the greater
part of the individual cases, it may be of trifling moment, the
sum of all these produces an amount, which it is always worthy of
the government of a large and active population to attend to. The
remedy is simple and obvious: it would only be necessary, at each
letter-box, to have a light frame of iron projecting from the
house over the pavement, and carrying the letters G. P., or T.
P., or any other distinctive sign. All private signs are at
present very properly prohibited from projecting into the street:
the passenger, therefore, would at once know where to direct his
attention, in order to discover a post-office; and those
letter-boxes which occurred in the great thoroughfares could not
fail to be generally known.



Chapter 7

Exerting Forces Too Great for Human Power, and Executing
Operations Too Delicate for Human Touch

56. It requires some skill and a considerable apparatus to
enable many men to exert their whole force at a given point; and
when this number amounts to hundreds or to thousands, additional
difficulties present themselves. If ten thousand men were hired
to act simultaneously, it would be exceedingly difficult to
discover whether each exerted his whole force, and consequently,
to be assured that each man did the duty for which he was paid.
And if still larger bodies of men or animals were necessary, not
only would the difficulty of directing them become greater, but
the expense would increase from the necessity of transporting
food for their subsistence.

The difficulty of enabling a large number of men to exert
their force at the same instant of time has been almost obviated
by the use of sound. The whistle of the boatswain performs this
service on board ships; and in removing, by manual force, the
vast mass of granite, weighing above 1,400 tons, on which the
equestrian figure of Peter the Great is placed at St Petersburgh,
a drummer was always stationed on its summit to give the signal
for the united efforts of the workmen.

An ancient Egyptian drawing was discovered a few years since,
by Champollion, in which a multitude of men appeared harnessed to
a huge block of stone, on the top of which stood a single
individual with his hands raised above his head, apparently in
the act of clapping them, for the purpose of insuring the
exertion of their combined force at the same moment of time.

57. In mines, it is sometimes necessary to raise or lower
great weights by capstans requiring the force of more than one
hundred men. These work upon the surface; but the directions must
be communicated from below, perhaps from the depth of two hundred
fathoms. This communication, however, is accomplished with ease
and certainty by signals: the usual apparatus is a kind of
clapper placed on the surface close to the capstan, so that every
man may hear, and put in motion from below by a rope passing up
the shaft.

At Wheal Friendship mine in Cornwall, a different contrivance
is employed: there is in that mine an inclined plane, passing
underground about two-thirds of a mile in length. Signals are
communicated by a continuous rod of metal, which being struck
below, the blow is distinctly heard on the surface.

58. In all our larger manufactories numerous instances occur
of the application of the power of steam to overcome resistances
which it would require far greater expense to surmount by means
of animal labour. The twisting of the largest cables, the
rolling, hammering, and cutting large masses of iron, the
draining of our mines, all require enormous exertions of physical
force continued for considerable periods of time. Other means are
had recourse to when the force required is great, and the space
through which it is to act is small. The hydraulic press of
Bramah can, by the exertion of one man, produce a pressure of
1,500 atmospheres; and with such an instrument a hollow cylinder
of wrought iron three inches thick has been burst. In rivetting
together the iron plates, out of which steam-engine boilers are
made, it is necessary to produce as close a joint as possible.
This is accomplished by using the rivets red-hot: while they are
in that state the two plates of iron are rivetted together, and
the contraction which the rivet undergoes in cooling draws them
together with a force which is only limited by the tenacity of
the metal of which the rivet itself is made.

59. It is not alone in the greater operations of the engineer
or the manufacturer, that those vast powers which man has called
into action, in availing himself of the agency of steam, are
fully developed. Wherever the individual operation demanding
little force for its own performance is to be multiplied in
almost endless repetition, commensurate power is required. It is
the same 'giant arm' which twists 'the largest cable', that spins
from the cotton plant an 'almost gossamer thread'. Obedient to
the hand which called into action its resistless powers, it
contends with the ocean and the storm, and rides triumphant
through dangers and difficulties unattempted by the older modes
of navigation. It is the same engine that, in its more regulated
action, weaves the canvas it may one day supersede, or, with
almost fairy fingers, entwines the meshes of the most delicate
fabric that adorns the female form.(1*)

60. The Fifth Report of the Select Committee of the House of
Commons on the Holyhead Roads furnishes ample proof of the great
superiority of steam vessels. The following extracts are taken
from the evidence of Captain Rogers, the commander of one of the
packets:

Question. Are you not perfectly satisfied, from the experience
you have had, that the steam vessel you command is capable of
performing what no sailing vessel can do?
Answer. Yes.

Question. During your passage from Gravesend to the Downs, could
any square-rigged vessel, from a first-rate down to a sloop of
war, have performed the voyage you did in the time you did it in
the steamboat?
Answer. No: it was impossible. In the Downs we passed several
Indiamen, and 150 sail there that could not move down the
channel: and at the back of Dungeness we passed 120 more.

Question. At the time you performed that voyage, with the weather
you have described, from the Downs to Milford, if that weather
had continued twelve months, would any square-rigged vessel have
performed it?
Answer. They would have been a long time about it: probably,
would have been weeks instead of days. A sailing vessel would not
have beat up to Milford, as we did, in twelve months.


61. The process of printing on the silver paper, which is
necessary for bank-notes, is attended with some inconvenience,
from the necessity of damping the paper previously to taking the
impression. It was difficult to do this uniformly and in the old
process of dipping a parcel of several sheets together into a
vessel of water, the outside sheets becoming much more wet than
the others, were very apt to be torn. A method has been adopted
at the Bank of Ireland which obviates this inconvenience. The
whole quantity of paper to be damped is placed in a close vessel
from which the air is exhausted; water is then admitted, and
every leaf is completely wetted; the paper is then removed to a
press, and all the superfluous moisture is squeezed out.

62. The operation of pulverizing solid substances and of
separating the powders of various degrees of fineness, is common
in the arts: and as the best graduated sifting fails in effecting
this separation with sufficient delicacy, recourse is had to
suspension in a fluid medium. The substance when reduced by
grinding to the finest powder is agitated in water which is then
drawn off: the coarsest portion of the suspended matter first
subsides, and that which requires the longest time to fall down
is the finest. In this manner even emery powder, a substance of
great density, is separated into the various degrees of fineness
which are required. Flints, after being burned and ground, are
suspended in water, in order to mix them intimately with clay,
which is also suspended in the same fluid for the formation of
porcelain. The water is then in part evaporated by heat, and the
plastic compound, out of which our most beautiful porcelain is
formed, remains. It is a curious fact, and one which requires
further examination than it has yet received, that, if this
mixture be suffered to remain long at rest before it is worked
up, it becomes useless; for it is then found that the silex,
which at first was uniformly mixed, becomes aggregated together
in small lumps. This parallel to the formation of flints in the
chalk strata deserves attention.(2*)

63. The slowness with which powders subside, depends partly
on the specific gravity of the substance, and partly on the
magnitude of the particles themselves. Bodies, in falling through
a resisting medium, after a certain time acquire a uniform
velocity, which is called their terminal velocity, with which
they continue to descend: when the particles are very small, and
the medium dense, as water, this terminal velocity is soon
arrived at. Some of the finer powders even of emery require
several hours to subside through a few feet of water, and the mud
pumped up into our cisterns by some of the water companies is
suspended during a still longer time. These facts furnish us with
some idea of the great extent over which deposits of river mud
may be spread; for if the mud of any river whose waters enter the
Gulf Stream, sink through one foot in an hour, it might be
carried by that stream 1,500 miles before it had sunk to the
depth of 600 or 700 feet.

64. A number of small filaments of cotton project from even
the best spun thread, and when this thread is woven into muslin
they injure its appearance. To cut these off separately is quite
impossible, but they are easily removed by passing the muslin
rapidly over a cylinder of iron kept at a dull red heat: the time
during which each portion of the muslin is in contact with the
red-hot iron is too short to heat it to the burning point; but
the filaments being much finer, and being pressed close to the
hot metal, are burnt.

The removal of these filaments from patent net is still more
necessary for its perfection. The net is passed at a moderate
velocity through a flame of gas issuing from a very long and
narrow slit. Immediately above the flame a long funnel is fixed,
which is connected with a large air-pump worked by a
steam-engine. The flame is thus drawn forcibly through the net,
and all the filaments on both sides of it are burned off at one
operation. Previously to this application of the air-pump, the
net acting in the same way, although not to the same extent, as
the wire-gauze in Davy's safety lamp, cooled down the flame so as
to prevent the combustion of the filaments on the upper side: the
air-pump by quickening the current of ignited gas, removes this
inconvenience.

NOTES:

1. The importance and diversified applications of the steam
engine were most ably enforced in the speeches made at a public
meeting held (June 1824) for the purpose of proposing the
erection of a monument to the memory of James Watt; these were
subsequently printed.

2. Some observations on the subject, by Dr Fitton, occur in the
appendix to Captain King's Survey of the Coast of Australia, vol.
ii, p. 397. London, 1826.



Chapter 8

Registering Operations

65. One great advantage which we may derive from machinery is
from the check which it affords against the inattention, the
idleness, or the dishonesty of human agents. Few occupations are
more wearisome than counting a series of repetitions of the same
fact; the number of paces we walk affords a tolerably good
measure of distance passed over, but the value of this is much
enhanced by possessing an instrument, the pedometer, which will
count for us the number of steps we have made. A piece of
mechanism of this kind is sometimes applied to count the number
of turns made by the wheel of a carriage, and thus to indicate
the distance travelled: an instrument, similar in its object,
but differing in its construction, has been used for counting the
number of strokes made by a steam-engine, and the number of coins
struck in a press. One of the simplest instruments for counting
any series of operations, was contrived by Mr Donkin.(1*)

66. Another instrument for registering is used in some
establishments for calendering and embossing. Many hundred
thousand yards of calicoes and stuffs undergo these operations
weekly; and as the price paid for the process is small, the value
of the time spent in measuring them would bear a considerable
proportion to the profit. A machine has, therefore, been
contrived for measuring and registering the length of the goods
as they pass rapidly through the hands of the operator, by which
all chance of erroneous counting is avoided.

67. Perhaps the most useful contrivance of this kind, is one
for ascertaining the vigilance of a watchman. It is a piece of
mechanism connected with a clock placed in an apartment to which
the watchman has not access; but he is ordered to pull a string
situated in a certain part of his round once in every hour. The
instrument, aptly called a tell-tale, informs the owner whether
the man has missed any, and what hours during the night.

68. It is often of great importance, both for regulations of
excise as well as for the interest of the proprietor, to know the
quantity of spirits or of other liquors which have been drawn off
by those persons who are allowed to have access to the vessels
during the absence of the inspectors or principals. This may be
accomplished by a peculiar kind of stop-cock--which will, at
each opening, discharge only a certain measure of fluid the
number of times the cock has been turned being registered by a
counting apparatus accessible only to the master.

69. The time and labour consumed in gauging the contents of
casks partly filled, has led to an improvement which, by the
simplest means, obviates a considerable inconvenience, and
enables any person to read off, on a scale, the number of gallons
contained in any vessel, as readily as he does the degree of heat
indicated by his thermometer. A small stop-cock connects the
bottom of the cask with a glass tube of narrow bore fixed to a
scale on the side of the cask, and rising a little above its top.
The plug of the cock may be turned into three positions: in the
first, it cuts off all communication with the cask: in the
second, it opens a communication between the cask and the glass
tube: and, in the third. It cuts off the connection between the
cask and the tube, and opens a communication between the tube and
any vessel held beneath the cock to receive its contents. The
scale of the tube is graduated by pouring into the cask
successive quantities of water, while the communication between
the cask and the tube is open. Lines are then drawn on the scale
opposite the places in the tube to which the water rises at each
addition, and the scale being thus formed by actual
measurement,(2*) the contents of each cask are known by
inspection, and the tedious process of gauging is altogether
dispensed with. Other advantages accrue from this simple
contrivance, in the great economy of time which it introduces in
making mixtures of different spirits, in taking stock, and in
receiving spirit from the distiller.

70. The gas-meter, by which the quantity of gas used by each
consumer is ascertained, is another instrument of this kind. They
are of various forms, but all of them intended to register the
number of cubic feet of gas which has been delivered. It is very
desirable that these meters should be obtainable at a moderate
price, and that every consumer should employ them; because, by
making each purchaser pay only for what he consumes, and by
preventing that extravagant waste of gas which we frequently
observe, the manufacturer of gas will be enabled to make an equal
profit at a diminished price to the consumer.

71. The sale of water by the different companies in London,
might also, with advantage, be regulated by a meter. If such a
system were adopted, much water which is now allowed to run to
waste would be saved, and an unjust inequality between the rates
charged on different houses by the same company be avoided.

72. Another most important object to which a meter might be
applied, would be to register the quantity of water passing into
the boilers of steam-engines. Without this, our knowledge of the
quantity evaporated by different boilers, and with fireplaces of
different constructions, as well as our estimation of the duty of
steam-engines, must evidently be imperfect.

73. Another purpose to which machinery for registering
operations is applied with much advantage is the determination of
the average effect of natural or artificial agents. The mean
height of the barometer, for example, is ascertained by noting
its height at a certain number of intervals during the
twenty-four hours. The more these intervals are contracted, the
more correctly will the mean be ascertained; but the true mean
ought to be influenced by each momentary change which has
occurred. Clocks have been proposed and made with this object, by
which a sheet of paper is moved, slowly and uniformly, before a
pencil fixed to a float upon the surface of the mercury in the
cup of the barometer. Sir David Brewster proposed, several years
ago to suspend a barometer, and swing it as a pendulum. The
variations in the atmosphere would thus alter the centre of
oscillation, and the comparison of such an instrument with a good
clock, would enable us to ascertain the mean altitude of the
barometer during any interval of the observer's absence.(3*)

An instrument for measuring and registering the quantity of
rain, was invented by Mr John Taylor, and described by him in the
Philosophical Magazine. It consists of an apparatus in which a
vessel that receives the rain falling into the reservoir tilts
over as soon as it is full, and then presents another similar
vessel to be filled, which in like manner, when full, tilts the
former one back again. The number of times these vessels are
emptied is registered by a train of wheels; and thus, without the
presence of the observer, the quantity of rain falling during a
whole year may be measured and recorded.

Instruments might also be contrived to determine the average
force of traction of horses--of the wind--of a stream or of any
irregular and fluctuating effort of animal or other natural
force.

74. Clocks and watches may be considered as instruments for
registering the number of vibrations performed by a pendulum or a
balance. The mechanism by which these numbers are counted is
technically called a scapement. It is not easy to describe: but
the various contrivances which have been adopted for this
purpose, are amongst the most interesting and most ingenious to
which mechanical science has given birth. Working models, on an
enlarged scale, are almost necessary to make their action
understood by the unlearned reader; and, unfortunately, these are
not often to be met with. A very fine collection of such models
exists amongst the collection of instruments at the University of
Prague.

Instruments of this kind have been made to extend their
action over considerable periods of time, and to register not
merely the hour of the day, but the days of the week, of the
month, of the year, and also to indicate the occurrence of
several astronomical phenomena.

Repeating clocks and watches may be considered as instruments
for registering time, which communicate their information only
when the owner requires it, by pulling a string, or by some
similar application.

An apparatus has recently been applied to watches, by which
the hand which indicates seconds leaves a small dot of ink on the
dial-plate whenever a certain stop or detent is pushed in. Thus,
whilst the eye is attentively fixed on the phenomenon to be
observed, the finger registers on the face of the watch-dial the
commencement and the end of its appearance.

75. Several instruments have been contrived for awakening the
attention of the observer at times previously fixed upon. The
various kinds of alarums connected with clocks and watches are of
this kind. In some instances it is desirable to be able to set
them so as to give notice at many successive and distant points
of time, such as those of the arrival of given stars on the
meridian. A clock of this kind is used at the Royal Observatory
at Greenwich.

76. An earthquake is a phenomenon of such frequent occurrence,
and so interesting, both from its fearful devastations as well as
from its connection with geological theories, that it becomes
important to possess an instrument which shall, if possible,
indicate the direction of the shock, as well as its intensity.
An observation made a few years since at Odessa, after an
earthquake which happened during the night, suggests a simple
instrument by which the direction of the shock may be determined.

A glass vase, partly filled with water, stood on the table of
a room in a house at Odessa; and, from the coldness of the glass,
the inner part of the vessel above the water was coated with dew.
Several very perceptible shocks of an earthquake happened between
three and four o'clock in the morning; and when the observer got
up, he remarked that the dew was brushed off at two opposite
sides of the glass by a wave which the earthquake had caused in
the water. The line joining the two highest points of this wave
was, of course, that in which the shock travelled. This
circumstance, which was accidentally noticed by an engineer at
Odessa,(4*) suggests the plan of keeping, in countries subject to
earthquakes, glass vessels partly filled with treacle, or some
unctuous fluid, so that when any lateral motion is communicated
to them from the earth, the adhesion of the liquid to the glass
shall enable the observer, after some interval of time, to
determine the direction of the shock.

In order to obtain some measure of the vertical oscillation
of the earth, a weight might be attached to a spiral spring, or a
pendulum might be sustained in a horizontal position, and a
sliding index be moved by either of them, so that the extreme
deviations should be indicated by it. This, however, would not
give even the comparative measure accurately, because a
difference in the velocity of the rising or falling of the
earth's surface would affect the instrument.

NOTES:

1. Transactions of the Society of Arts, 1819, p. 116.

2. The contrivance is due to Mr Hencky, of High Holborn, in whose
establishment it is in constant use.

3. About seven or eight years since, without being aware of Sir
David Brewster's proposal. I adapted a barometer, as a pendulum,
to the works of a common eight day clock: it remained in my
library for several months, but I have mislaid the observations
which were made.

4. Memoires de l'Academie des Sciences de Petersburgh, 6e serie,
tom. i. p. 4.



Chapter 9

Economy of the Materials Employed

77. The precision with which all operations by machinery are
executed, and the exact similarity of the articles thus made,
produce a degree of economy in the consumption of the raw
material which is, in some cases, of great importance. The
earliest mode of cutting the trunk of a tree into planks, was by
the use of the hatchet or the adze. It might, perhaps, be first
split into three or four portions, and then each portion was
reduced to a uniform surface by those instruments. With such
means the quantity of plank produced would probably not equal the
quantity of the raw material wasted by the process: and, if the
planks were thin, would certainly fall far short of it. An
improved tool, completely reverses the case: in converting a tree
into thick planks, the saw causes a waste of a very small
fractional part; and even in reducing it to planks of only an
inch in thickness, does not waste more than an eighth part of the
raw material. When the thickness of the plank is still further
reduced, as is the case in cutting wood for veneering, the
quantity of material destroyed again begins to bear a
considerable proportion to that which is used; and hence circular
saws, having a very thin blade, have been employed for such
purposes. In order to economize still further the more valuable
woods, Mr Brunel contrived a machine which, by a system of
blades, cut off the veneer in a continuous shaving, thus
rendering the whole of the piece of timber available.

78. The rapid improvements which have taken place in the
printing press during the last twenty years, afford another
instance of saving in the materials consumed, which has been well
ascertained by measurement, and is interesting from its
connection with literature. In the old method of inking type, by
large hemispherical balls stuffed and covered with leather, the
printer, after taking a small portion of ink from the ink-block,
was continually rolling the balls in various directions against
each other, in order that a thin layer of ink might be uniformly
spread over their surface. This he again transferred to the type
by a kind of rolling action. In such a process, even admitting
considerable skill in the operator, it could not fail to happen
that a large quantity of ink should get near the edges of the
balls, which, not being transferred to the type, became hard and
useless, and was taken off in the form of a thick black crust.
Another inconvenience also arose--the quantity of ink spread on
the block not being regulated by measure, and the number and
direction of the transits of the inking-balls over each other
depending on the will of the operator, and being consequently
irregular, it was impossible to place on the type a uniform layer
of ink, of the quantity exactly sufficient for the impression.
The introduction of cylindrical rollers of an elastic substance,
formed by the mixture of glue and treacle, superseded the
inking-balls, and produced considerable saving in the consumption
of ink: but the most perfect economy was only to be produced by
mechanism. When printing-presses, moved by the power of steam,
were introduced, the action of these rollers was found to be well
adapted to their performance; and a reservoir of ink was formed,
from which a roller regularly abstracted a small quantity at each
impression. From three to five other rollers spread this portion
uniformly over a slab (by most ingenious contrivances varied in
almost each kind of press), and another travelling roller, having
fed itself on the slab, passed and repassed over the type just
before it gave the impression to the paper.

In order to shew that this plan of inking puts the proper
quantity of ink upon the type, we must prove, first--that the
quantity is not too little: this would soon have been discovered
from the complaints of the public and the booksellers; and,
secondly that it is not too great. This latter point was
satisfactorily established by an experiment. A few hours after
one side of a sheet of paper has been printed upon, the ink is
sufficiently dry to allow it to receive the impression upon the
other; and, as considerable pressure is made use of, the tympan
on which the side first printed is laid, is guarded from soiling
it by a sheet of paper called the set-off sheet. This paper
receives, in succession, every sheet of the work to be printed,
acquiring from them more or less of the ink, according to their
dryness, or the quantity upon them. It was necessary in the
former process, after about one hundred impressions, to change
this set-off sheet, which then became too much soiled for further
use. In the new method of printing by machinery, no such sheet is
used, but a blanket is employed as its substitute; this does not
require changing above once in five thousand impressions, and
instances have occurred of its remaining sufficiently clean for
twenty thousand. Here, then, is a proof that the quantity of
superfluous ink put upon the paper in machine-printing is so
small, that, if multiplied by five thousand, and in some
instances even by twenty thousand, it is only sufficient to
render useless a single piece of clean cloth.(1*) The following
were the results of an accurate experiment upon the effect of the
process just described, made at one of the largest printing
establishments in the metropolis.(2*) Two hundred reams of paper
were printed off, the old method of inking with balls being
employed; two hundred reams of the same paper, and for the same
book, were then printed off in the presses which inked their own
type. The consumption of ink by the machine was to that by the
balls as four to nine, or rather less than one-half.

NOTES:

1. In the very best kind of printing, it is necessary, in the old
method, to change the set-off sheet once in twelve times. In
printing the same kind of work by machinery, the blanket is
changed once in 2000.

2. This experiment was made at the establishment of Mr Clowes, in
Stamford Street.



Chapter 10

Of the Identity of the Work When It is of the Same Kind, and its
Accuracy when of Different Kinds

79. Nothing is more remarkable, and yet less unexpected, than
the perfect identity of things manufactured by the same tool. If
the top of a circular box is to be made to fit over the lower
part, it may be done in the lathe by gradually advancing the tool
of the sliding-rest; the proper degree of tightness between the
box and its lid being found by trial. After this adjustment, if a
thousand boxes are made, no additional care is required; the tool
is always carried up to the stop, and each box will be equally
adapted to every lid. The same identity pervades all the arts of
printing; the impressions from the same block, or the same
copperplate, have a similarity which no labour could produce by
hand. The minutest traces are transferred to all the impressions,
and no omission can arise from the inattention or unskilfulness
of the operator. The steel punch, with which the cardwadding for
a fowling-piece is cut, if it once perform its office with
accuracy, constantly reproduces the same exact circle.

80. The accuracy with which machinery executes its work is,
perhaps, one of its most important advantages: it may, however,
be contended, that a considerable portion of this advantage may
be resolved into saving of time; for it generally happens, that
any improvement in tools increases the quantity of work done in a
given time. Without tools, that is, by the mere efforts of the
human hand, there are, undoubtedly, multitudes of things which it
would be impossible to make. Add to the human hand the rudest
cutting instrument, and its powers are enlarged: the fabrication
of many things then becomes easy, and that of others possible
with great labour. Add the saw to the knife or the hatchet, and
other works become possible, and a new course of difficult
operations is brought into view, whilst many of the former are
rendered easy. This observation is applicable even to the most
perfect tools or machines. It would be possible for a very
skilful workman, with files and polishing substances, to form a
cylinder out of a piece of steel; but the time which this would
require would be so considerable, and the number of failures
would probably be so great, that for all practical purposes such
a mode of producing a steel cylinder might be said to be
impossible. The same process by the aid of the lathe and the
sliding-rest is the everyday employment of hundreds of workmen.

81. Of all the operations of mechanical art, that of turning
is the most perfect. If two surfaces are worked against each
other, whatever may have been their figure at the commencement,
there exists a tendency in them both to become portions of
spheres. Either of them may become convex, and the other concave,
with various degrees of curvature. A plane surface is the line of
separation between convexity and concavity, and is most difficult
to hit; it is more easy to make a good circle than to produce a
straight line. A similar difficulty takes place in figuring
specula for telescopes; the parabola is the surface which
separates the hyperbolic from the elliptic figure, and is the
most difficult to form. If a spindle, not cylindrical at its end,
be pressed into a hole not circular, and kept constantly turning,
there is a tendency in these two bodies so situated to become
conical, or to have circular sections. If a triangular-pointed
piece of iron be worked round in a circular hole the edges will
gradually wear, and it will become conical. These facts, if
they do not explain, at least illustrate the principles on
which the excellence of work formed in the lathe depends.



Chapter 11

Of Copying

82. The two last-mentioned sources of excellence in the work
produced by machinery depend on a principle which pervades a very
large portion of all manufactures, and is one upon which the
cheapness of the articles produced seems greatly to depend. The
principle alluded to is that of copying, taken in its most
extensive sense. Almost unlimited pains are, in some instances,
bestowed on the original, from which a series of copies is to be
produced; and the larger the number of these copies, the more
care and pains can the manufacturer afford to lavish upon the
original. It may thus happen, that the instrument or tool
actually producing the work, shall cost five or even ten thousand
times the price of each individual specimen of its power.

As the system of copying is of so much importance, and of
such extensive use in the arts, it will be convenient to classify
a considerable number of those processes in which it is employed.
The following enumeration however is not offered as a complete
list; and the explanations are restricted to the shortest
possible detail which is consistent with a due regard to making
the subject intelligible.

Operations of copying are effected under the following
circumstances:

by printing from cavities          by stamping
by printing from surface           by punching
by casting                         with elongation
by moulding                        with altered dimensions


Of printing from cavities

83. The art of printing, in all its numerous departments, is
essentially an art of copying. Under its two great divisions,
printing from hollow lines, as in copperplate, and printing from
surface, as in block printing, are comprised numerous arts.

84. Copperplate printing. In this instance, the copies are
made by transferring to paper, by means of pressure, a thick ink,
from the hollows and lines cut in the copper. An artist will
sometimes exhaust the labour of one or two years upon engraving a
plate, which will not, in some cases furnish above five hundred
copies in a state of perfection.

85. Engravings on steel. This art is like that of engraving
on copper, except that the number of copies is far less limited.
A bank-note engraved as a copperplate, will not give above three
thousand impressions without a sensible deterioration. Two
impressions of a bank-note engraved on steel were examined by one
of our most eminent artists,(1*) who found it difficult to
pronounce with any confidence, which was the earliest impression.
One of these was a proof from amongst the first thousand, the
other was taken after between seventy and eighty thousand had
been printed off.

86. Music printing. Music is usually printed from pewter
plates, on which the characters have been impressed by steel
punches. The metal being much softer than copper, is liable to
scratches, which detain a small portion of the ink. This is the
reason of the dirty appearance of printed music. A new process
has recently been invented by Mr Cowper, by which this
inconvenience will be avoided. The improved method, which give
sharpness to the characters, is still an art of copying; but it
is effected by surface printing, nearly in the same manner as
calico-printing from blocks, to be described hereafter, 96. The
method of printing music from pewter plates, although by far the
most frequently made use of, is not the only one employed, for
music is occasionally printed from stone. Sometimes also it is
printed with moveable type; and occasionally the musical
characters are printed on the paper, and the lines printed
afterwards. Specimens of both these latter modes of
music-printing may be seen in the splendid collection of
impressions from the types of the press of Bodoni at Parma: but
notwithstanding the great care bestowed on the execution of that
work, the perpetual interruption of continuity in the lines,
arising from the use of moveable types, when the characters and
lines are printed at the same time, is apparent.

87. Calico printing from cylinders. Many of the patterns on
printed calicos are copies by printing from copper cylinders
about four or five inches in diameter, on which the desired
pattern has been previously engraved. One portion of the
cylinders is exposed to the ink, whilst an elastic scraper of
very thin steel, by being pressed forcibly against another part,
removes all superfluous ink from the surface previously to its
reaching the cloth. A piece of calico twenty-eight yards in
length rolls through this press, and is printed in four or five
minutes.

88. Printing from perforated sheets of metal, or stencilling.
Very thin brass is sometimes perforated in the form of letters,
usually those of a name; this is placed on any substance which it
is required to mark, and a brush dipped in some paint is passed
over the brass. Those parts which are cut away admit the paint.
and thus a copy of the name appears on the substance below. This
method, which affords rather a coarse copy, is sometimes used for
paper with which rooms are covered, and more especially for the
borders. If a portion be required to match an old pattern, this
is, perhaps the most economical way of producing it.

89. Coloured impressions of leaves upon paper may be made by
a kind of surface printing. Such leaves are chosen as have
considerable inequalities: the elevated parts of these are
covered, by means of an inking ball, with a mixture of some
pigment ground up in linseed oil; the leaf is then placed between
two sheets of paper, and being gently pressed, the impression
from the elevated parts on each side appear on the corresponding
sheets of paper.

90. The beautiful red cotton handkerchiefs dyed at Glasgow
have their pattern given to them by a process similar to
stencilling, except that instead of printing from a pattern, the
reverse operation that of discharging a part of the colour from a
cloth already dyed--is performed. A number of handkerchiefs are
pressed with very great force between two plates of metal, which
are similarly perforated with round or lozenge-shaped holes,
according to the intended pattern. The upper plate of metal is
surrounded by a rim, and a fluid which has the property of
discharging the red dye is poured upon that plate. This liquid
passes through the holes in the metal, and also through the
calico; but, owing to the great pressure opposite all the parts
of the plates not cut away, it does not spread itself beyond the
pattern. After this, the handkerchiefs are washed, and the
pattern of each is a copy of the perforations in the metal-plate
used in the process.

Another mode by which a pattern is formed by discharging
colour from a previously dyed cloth, is to print on it a pattern
with paste; then, passing it into the dying-vat, it comes out
dyed of one uniform colour. But the paste has protected the fibres
of the cotton from the action of the dye or mordant; and when the
cloth so dyed is well washed, the paste is dissolved, and leaves
uncoloured all those parts of the cloth to which it was applied.


Printing from surface

91. This second department of printing is of more frequent
application in the arts than that which has just been considered.

92. Printing from wooden blocks. A block of box wood is, in
this instance, the substance out of which the pattern is formed:
the design being sketched upon it, the workman cuts away with
sharp tools every part except the lines to be represented in the
impression. This is exactly the reverse of the process of
engraving on copper, in which every line to be represented is cut
away. The ink, instead of filling the cavities cut in the wood,
is spread upon the surface which remains, and is thence
transferred to the paper.

93. Printing from moveable types. This is the most important
in its influence of all the arts of copying. It possesses a
singular peculiarity, in the immense subdivision of the parts
that form the pattern. After that pattern has furnished thousands
of copies, the same individual elements may be arranged again and
again in other forms, and thus supply multitudes of originals,
from each of which thousands of their copied impressions may
flow. It also possesses this advantage, that woodcuts may be used
along with the letterpress, and impressions taken from both at
the same operation.

94. Printing from stereotype. This mode of producing copies
is very similar to the preceding. There are two modes by which
stereotype plates are produced. In that most generally adopted a
mould is taken in plaster from the moveable types, and in this
the stereotype plate is cast. Another method has been employed in
France: instead of composing the work in moveable type, it was
set up in moveable copper matrices; each matrix being in fact a
piece of copper of the same size as the type, and having the
impression of the letter sunk into its surface instead of
projecting in relief. A stereotype plate may, it is evident, be
obtained at once from this arrangement of matrices. The objection
to the plan is the great expense of keeping so large a collection
of matrices.

As the original composition does not readily admit of change,
stereotype plates can only be applied with advantage to cases
where an extraordinary number of copies are demanded, or where
the work consists of figures, and it is of great importance to
ensure accuracy. Trifling alterations may, however, be made in it
from time to time; and thus mathematical tables may, by the
gradual extirpation of error, at last become perfect. This mode
of producing copies possesses, in common with that by moveable
types, the advantage of admitting the use of woodcuts: the copy
of the woodcut in the stereotype plate being equally perfect.
with that of the moveable type. This union is of considerable
importance, and cannot be accomplished with engravings on copper.

95. Lettering books. The gilt letters on the backs of books
are formed by placing a piece of gold leaf upon the leather, and
pressing upon it brass letters previously heated: these cause the
gold immediately under them to adhere to the leather, whilst the
rest of the metal is easily brushed away. When a great number of
copies of the same volume are to be lettered, it is found to be
cheaper to have a brass pattern cut with the whole of the proper
title: this is placed in a press, and being kept hot, the covers,
each having a small bit of leaf-gold placed in the proper
position, are successively brought under the brass, and stamped.
The lettering at the back of the volume in the reader's hand was
executed in this manner.

96. Calico printing from blocks. This is a mode of copying,
by surface printing, from the ends of small pieces of copper
wire, of various forms, fixed into a block of wood. They are all
of one uniform height, about the eighth part of an inch above the
surface of the wood, and are arranged by the maker into any
required pattern. If the block be placed upon a piece of fine
woollen cloth, on which ink of any colour has been uniformly
spread, the projecting copper wires receive a portion, which they
give up when applied to the calico to be printed. By the former
method of printing on calico, only one colour could be used; but
by this plan, after the flower of a rose, for example, has been
printed with one set of blocks, the leaves may be printed of
another colour by a different set.

97. Printing oilcloth. After the canvas, which forms the
basis of oilcloth, has been covered with paint of one uniform
tint, the remainder of the processes which it passes through, are
a series of copyings by surface printing, from patterns formed
upon wooden blocks very similar to those employed by the calico
printer. Each colour requiring a distinct set of blocks, those
oilcloths with the greatest variety of colours are most
expensive.

There are several other varieties of printing which we shall
briefly notice as arts of copying; which, although not strictly
surface printing, yet are more allied to it than that from
copperplates.

98. Letter copying. In one of the modes of performing this
process, a sheet of very thin paper is damped, and placed upon
the writing to be copied. The two papers are then passed through
a rolling press, and a portion of the ink from one paper is
transferred to the other. The writing is, of course, reversed by
this process; but the paper to which it is transferred being
thin, the characters are seen through it on the other side, in
their proper position. Another common mode of copying letters is
by placing a sheet of paper covered on both sides with a
substance prepared from lamp-black, between a sheet of thin paper
and the paper on which the letter to be despatched is to be
written. If the upper or thin sheet be written upon with any hard
pointed substance, the word written with this style will be
impressed from the black paper upon both those adjoining it. The
translucency of the upper sheet, which is retained by the writer,
is in this instance necessary to render legible the writing which
is on the back of the paper. Both these arts are very limited in
their extent, the former affording two or three, the latter from
two to perhaps ten or fifteen copies at the same time.

99. Printing on china. This is an art of copying which is
carried to a very great extent. As the surfaces to which the
impression is to be conveyed are often curved, and sometimes even
fluted, the ink, or paint, is first transferred from the copper
to some flexible substance, such as paper, or an elastic compound
of glue and treacle. It is almost immediately conveyed from this
to the unbaked biscuit, to which it more readily adheres.

100. Lithographic printing. This is another mode of producing
copies in almost unlimited number. The original which supplies
the copies is a drawing made on a stone of a slightly porous
nature, the ink employed for tracing it is made of such greasy
materials that when water is poured over the stone it shall not
wet the lines of the drawing. When a roller covered with printing
ink, which is of an oily nature, is passed over the stone
previously wetted, the water prevents this ink from adhering to
the uncovered portions; whilst the ink used in the drawing is of
such a nature that the printing ink adheres to it. In this state,
if a sheet of paper be placed upon the stone, and then passed
under a press, the printing ink will be transferred to the paper,
leaving the ink used in the drawing still adhering to the stone.

101. There is one application of lithographic printing which
does not appear to have received sufficient attention, and
perhaps further experiments are necessary to bring it to
perfection. It is the reprinting of works which have just arrived
from other countries. A few years ago one of the Paris newspapers
was reprinted at Brussels as soon as it arrived by means of
lithography. Whilst the ink is yet fresh, this may easily be
accomplished: it is only necessary to place one copy of the
newspaper on a lithographic stone; and by means of great pressure
applied to it in a rolling press, a sufficient quantity of the
printing ink will be transferred to the stone. By similar means,
the other side of the newspaper may be copied on another stone,
and these stones will then furnish impressions in the usual way.
If printing from stone could be reduced to the same price per
thousand as that from moveable types, this process might be
adopted with great advantage for the supply of works for the use
of distant countries possessing the same language. For a single
copy might be printed off with transfer ink, and thus an English
work, for example, might be published in America from stone,
whilst the original, printed from moveable types, made its
appearance on the same day in England.

102. It is much to be wished that such a method were
applicable to the reprinting of facsimiles of old and scarce
books. This, however, would require the sacrifice of two copies,
since a leaf must be destroyed for each page. Such a method of
reproducing a small impression of an old work, is peculiarly
applicable to mathematical tables, the setting up of which in
type is always expensive and liable to error, but how long ink
will continue to be transferable to stone, from paper on which it
has been printed, must be determined by experiment. The
destruction of the greasy or oily portion of the ink in the
character of old books, seems to present the greatest impediment;
if one constituent only of the ink were removed by time, it might
perhaps be hoped, that chemical means would ultimately be
discovered for restoring it: but if this be unsuccessful, an
attempt might be made to discover some substance having a strong
affinity for the carbon of the ink which remains on the paper,
and very little for the paper itself.(2*)

103. Lithographic prints have occasionally been executed in
colours. In such instances a separate stone seems to have been
required for each colour, and considerable care, or very good
mechanism, must have been employed to adjust the paper to each
stone. If any two kinds of ink should be discovered mutually
inadhesive, one stone might be employed for two inks; or if the
inking-roller for the second and subsequent colours had portions
cut away corresponding to those parts of the stone inked by the
previous ones, then several colours might be printed from the
same stone: but these principles do not appear to promise much,
except for coarse subjects.

104. Register printing. It is sometimes thought necessary to
print from a wooden block, or stereotype plate, the same pattern
reversed upon the opposite side of the paper. The effect of this,
which is technically called Register printing, is to make it
appear as if the ink had penetrated through the paper, and
rendered the pattern visible on the other side. If the subject
chosen contains many fine lines, it seems at first sight
extremely difficult to effect so exact a super position of the
two patterns, on opposite sides of the same piece of paper, that
it shall be impossible to detect the slightest deviation; yet the
process is extremely simple. The block which gives the impression
is always accurately brought down to the same place by means of a
hinge; this spot is covered by a piece of thin leather stretched
over it; the block is now inked, and being brought down to its
place, gives an impression of the pattern to the leather: it is
then turned back; and being inked a second time, the paper
intended to be printed is placed upon the leather, when the block
again descending, the upper surface of the paper is printed from
the block, and its undersurface takes up the impression from the
leather. It is evident that the perfection of this mode of
printing depends in a great measure on finding some soft
substance like leather, which will take as much ink as it ought
from the block, and which will give it up most completely to
paper. Impressions thus obtained are usually fainter on the lower
side; and in order in some measure to remedy this defect, rather
more ink is put on the block at the first than at the second
impression.


Of copying by casting

105. The art of casting, by pouring substances in a fluid
state into a mould which retains them until they become solid, is
essentially an art of copying; the form of the thing produced
depending entirely upon that of the pattern from which it was
formed.

106. Of casting iron and other metals.--Patterns of wood or
metal made from drawings are the originals from which the moulds
for casting are made: so that, in fact, the casting itself is a
copy of the mould; and the mould is a copy of the pattern. In
castings of iron and metals for the coarser purposes, and, if
they are afterwards to be worked even for the finer machines,
the exact resemblance amongst the things produced, which takes
place in many of the arts to which we have alluded, is not
effected in the first instance, nor is this necessary. As the
metals shrink in cooling, the pattern is made larger than the
intended copy; and in extricating it from the sand in which it is
moulded, some little difference will occur in the size of the
cavity which it leaves. In smaller works where accuracy is more
requisite, and where few or no after operations are to be
performed, a mould of metal is employed which has been formed
with considerable care. Thus, in casting bullets, which ought to
be perfectly spherical and smooth, an iron instrument is used, in
which a cavity has been cut and carefully ground; and, in order
to obviate the contraction in cooling, a jet is left which may
supply the deficiency of metal arising from that cause, and which
is afterwards cut off. The leaden toys for children are cast in
brass moulds which open, and in which have been graved or
chiselled the figures intended to be produced.

107. A very beautiful mode of representing small branches of
the most delicate vegetable productions in bronze has been
employed by Mr Chantrey. A small strip of a fir-tree, a branch of
holly, a curled leaf of broccoli, or any other vegetable
production, is suspended by one end in a small cylinder of paper
which is placed for support within a similarly formed tin case.
The finest river silt, carefully separated from all the coarser
particles, and mixed with water, so as to have the consistency of
cream, is poured into the paper cylinder by small portions at a
time, carefully shaking the plant a little after each addition,
in order that its leaves may be covered, and that no bubbles of
air may be left. The plant and its mould are now allowed to dry,
and the yielding nature of the paper allows the loamy coating to
shrink from the outside.  When this is dry it is surrounded by a
coarser substance; and, finally, we have the twig with all its
leaves embedded in a perfect mould. This mould is carefully
dried, and then gradually heated to a red heat. At the ends of
some of the leaves or shoots, wires have been left to afford
airholes by their removal, and in this state of strong ignition a
stream of air is directed into the hole formed by the end of the
branch. The consequence is, that the wood and leaves which had
been turned into charcoal by the fire, are now converted into
carbonic acid by the current of air; and, after some time, the
whole of the solid matter of which the plant consisted is
completely removed, leaving a hollow mould, bearing on its
interior all the minutest traces of its late vegetable occupant.
When this process is completed, the mould being still kept at
nearly a red heat, receives the fluid metal, which, by its
weight, either drives the very small quantity of air, which at
that high temperature remains behind, out through the
airholes, or compresses it into the pores of very porous
substance of which the mould is formed.

108. When the form of the object intended to be cast is such
that the pattern cannot be extricated from its mould of sand or
plaster, it becomes necessary to make the pattern with wax, or
some other easily fusible substance. The sand or plaster is
moulded round this pattern, and, by the application of heat, the
wax is extricated through an opening left purposely for its
escape.

109. It is often desirable to ascertain the form of the
internal cavities, inhabited by molluscous animals, such as those
of spiral shells, and of the various corals. This may be
accomplished by filling them with fusible metal, and dissolving
the substance of the shell by muriatic acid; thus a metallic
solid will remain which exactly filled all the cavities. If such
forms are required in silver, or any other difficulty fusible
metal, the shells may be filled with wax or resin, then dissolved
away; and the remaining waxen form may serve as the pattern from
which a plaster mould may be made for casting the metal. Some
nicety will be required in these operations; and perhaps the
minuter cavities can only be filled under an exhausted receiver.

110. Casting in plaster. This is a mode of copying applied to
a variety of purposes: to produce accurate representations of the
human form--of statues--or of rare fossils--to which latter
purpose it has lately been applied with great advantage. In all
casting, the first process is to make the mould; and plaster is
the substance which is almost always employed for the purpose.
The property which it possesses of remaining for a short time in
a state of fluidity, renders it admirably adapted to this object,
and adhesion, even to an original of plaster, is effectually
prevented by oiling the surface on which it is poured. The mould
formed round the subject which is copied, removed in separate
pieces and then reunited, is that in which the copy is cast. This
process gives additional utility and value to the finest works of
art. The students of the Academy at Venice are thus enabled to
admire the sculptured figures of Egina, preserved in the gallery
at Munich; as well as the marbles of the Parthenon, the pride of
our own Museum. Casts in plaster of the Elgin marbles adorn many
of the academies of the Continent; and the liberal employment of
such presents affords us an inexpensive and permanent source of
popularity.

111. Casting in wax. This mode of copying, aided by proper
colouring, offers the most successful imitations of many objects
of natural history, and gives an air of reality to them which
might deceive even the most instructed. Numerous figures of
remarkable persons, having the face and hands formed in wax, have
been exhibited at various times; and the resemblances have, in
some instances been most striking. But whoever would see the art
of copying in wax carried to the highest perfection, should
examine the beautiful collection of fruit at the house of the
Horticultural Society; the model of the magnificent flower of the
new genus Rafflesia--the waxen models of the internal parts of
the human body which adorn the anatomical gallery of the Jardin
des Plantes at Paris, and the Museum at Florence--or the
collection of morbid anatomy at the University of Bologna. The
art of imitation by wax does not usually afford the multitude of
copies which flow from many similar operations. This number is
checked by the subsequent stages of the process, which, ceasing
to have the character of copying by a tool or pattern, become
consequently more expensive. In each individual production, form
alone is given by casting; the colouring must be the work of the
pencil, guided by the skill of the artist.


Of copying by moulding

112. This method of producing multitudes of individuals
having an exact resemblance to each other in external shape, is
adopted very widely in the arts. The substances employed are,
either naturally or by artificial preparation, in a soft or
plastic state; they are then compressed by mechanical force,
sometimes assisted by heat, into a mould of the required form.

113. Of bricks and tiles. An oblong box of wood fitting upon
a bottom fixed to the brickmaker's bench, is the mould from which
every brick is formed. A portion of the plastic mixture of which
the bricks consist is made ready by less skilful hands: the
workman first sprinkles a little sand into the mould, and then
throws the clay into it with some force; at the same time rapidly
working it with his fingers, so as to make it completely close up
to the corners. He next scrapes off, with a wetted stick, the
superfluous clay, and shakes the new-formed brick dexterously out
of its mould upon a piece of board, on which it is removed by
another workman to the place appointed for drying it. A very
skilful moulder has occasionally, in a long summer's day,
delivered from ten to eleven thousand bricks; but a fair average
day's work is from five to six thousand. Tiles of various kinds
and forms are made of finer materials, but by the same system of
moulding. Among the ruins of the city of Gour, the ancient
capital of Bengal, bricks are found having projecting ornaments
in high relief: these appear to have been formed in a mould, and
subsequently glazed with a coloured glaze. In Germany, also,
brickwork has been executed with various ornaments. The cornice
of the church of St Stephano, at Berlin, is made of large blocks
of brick moulded into the form required by the architect. At the
establishment of Messrs Cubitt, in Gray's Inn Lane, vases,
cornices, and highly ornamented capitals of columns are thus
formed which rival stone itself in elasticity, hardness, and
durability.

114. Of embossed china. Many of the forms given to those
beautiful specimens of earthenware which constitute the equipage
of our breakfast and our dinner-tables, cannot be executed in the
lathe of the potter. The embossed ornaments on the edges of the
plates, their polygonal shape, the fluted surface of many of the
vases, would all be difficult and costly of execution by the
hand; but they become easy and comparatively cheap, when made by
pressing the soft material out of which they are formed into a
hard mould. The care and skill bestowed on the preparation of
that mould are repaid by the multitude it produces. In many of
the works of the china manufactory, one part only of the article
is moulded; the upper surface of the plate, for example, whilst
the under side is figured by the lathe. In some instances, the
handle, or only a few ornaments, are moulded, and the body of the
work is turned.

115. Glass seals. The process of engraving upon gems requires
considerable time and skill. The seals thus produced can
therefore never become common. Imitations, however, have been
made of various degrees of resemblance. The colour which is given
to glass is, perhaps, the most successful part of the imitation.
A small cylindrical rod of coloured glass is heated in the flame
of a blowpipe, until the extremity becomes soft. The operator
then pinches it between the ends of a pair of nippers, which are
formed of brass, and on one side of which the device intended for
the seal has been carved in relief. When the mould has been well
finished and care is taken in heating the glass properly, the
seals thus produced are not bad imitations; and by this system of
copying they are so multiplied, that the more ordinary kinds are
sold at Birmingham for three pence a dozen.

116. Square glass bottles. The round forms which are usually
given to vessels of glass are readily produced by the expansion
of the air with which they are blown. It is, however, necessary
in many cases to make bottles of a square form, and each capable
of holding exactly the same quantity of fluid. It is also
frequently desirable to have imprinted on them the name of the
maker of the medicine or other liquid they are destined to
contain. A mould of iron, or of copper, is provided of the
intended size, on the inside of which are engraved the names
required. This mould, which is used in a hot state, opens into
two parts, to allow the insertion of the round, unfinished
bottle, which is placed in it in a very soft state before it is
removed from the end of the iron tube with which it was blown.
The mould is now closed, and the glass is forced against its
sides, by blowing strongly into the bottle.

117. Wooden snuff boxes. Snuff boxes ornamented with devices,
in imitation of carved work or of rose engine turning, are sold
at a price which proves that they are only imitations. The wood,
or horn, out of which they are formed, is softened by long
boiling in water, and whilst in this state it is forced into
moulds of iron, or steel, on which are cut the requisite
patterns, where it remains exposed to great pressure until it is
dry.

118. Horn knife handles and umbrella handles. The property
which horn possesses of becoming soft by the action of water and
of heat, fits it for many useful purposes. It is pressed into
moulds, and becomes embossed with figures in relief, adapted to
the objects to which it is to be applied. If curved, it may be
straightened; or if straight, it may be bent into any forms which
ornament or utility may require; and by the use of the mould
these forms may be multiplied in endless variety. The commoner
sorts of knives, the crooked handles for umbrellas, and a
multitude of other articles to which horn is applied, attest the
cheapness which the art of copying gives to the things formed of
this material.

119. Moulding tortoise-shell. The same principle is applied
to things formed out of the shell of the turtle, or the land
tortoise. From the greatly superior price of the raw material,
this principle of copying is, however, more rarely employed upon
it; and the few carvings which are demanded, are usually
performed by hand.

120. Tobacco-pipe making. This simple art is almost entirely
one of copying. The moulds are formed of iron, in two parts, each
embracing one half of the stem; the line of junction of these
parts may generally be observed running lengthwise from one end
of the pipe to the other. The hole passing to the bowl is formed
by thrusting a long wire through the clay before it is enclosed
in the mould. Some of the moulds have figures, or names, sunk in
the inside, which give a corresponding figure in relief upon the
finished pipe.

121. Embossing upon calico. Calicoes of one colour, but
embossed all over with raised patterns, though not much worn in
this country, are in great demand in several foreign markets.
This appearance is produced by passing them between rollers, on
one of which is figured in intaglio the pattern to be transferred
to the calico. The substance of the cloth is pressed very
forcibly into the cavities thus formed, and retains its pattern
after considerable use. The watered appearance in the cover of
the volume in the reader's hands is produced in a similar manner.
A cylinder of gun-metal, on which the design of the watering is
previously cut, is pressed by screws against another cylinder,
formed out of pieces of brown paper which have been strongly
compressed together and accurately turned. The two cylinders are
made to revolve rapidly, the paper one being slightly damped,
and, after a few minutes, it takes an impression from the upper
or metal one. The glazed calico is now passed between the
rollers, its glossy surface being in contact with the metal
cylinder, which is kept hot by a heated iron enclosed within it.
Calicoes are sometimes watered by placing two pieces on each
other in such a position that the longitudinal threads of the one
are at right angles to those of the other, and compressing them
in this state between flat rollers. The threads of the one piece
produce indentations in those of the other, but they are not so
deep as when produced by the former method.

122. Embossing upon leather. This art of copying from
patterns previously engraved on steel rollers is in most respects
similar to the preceding. The leather is forced into the
cavities, and the parts which are not opposite to any cavity are
powerfully condensed between the rollers.

123. Swaging. This is an art of copying practised by the
smith. In order to fashion his iron and steel into the various
forms demanded by his customers, he has small blocks of steel
into which are sunk cavities of different shapes; these are
called swages, and are generally in pairs. Thus if he wants a
round bolt, terminating in a cylindrical head of larger diameter,
and having one or more projecting rims, he uses a corresponding
swaging tool; and having heated the end of his iron rod, and
thickened it by striking the end in the direction of the axis
(which is technically called upsetting), he places its head upon
one part of the lage; and whilst an assistant holds the other
part on the top of the hot iron, he strikes it several times with
his hammer, occasionally turning the head one quarter round. The
heated iron is thus forced by the blows to assume the form of the
mould into which it is impressed.

124. Engraving by pressure. This is one of the most beautiful
examples of the art of copying carried to an almost unlimited
extent; and the delicacy with which it can be executed, and the
precision with which the finest traces of the graving tool can be
transferred from steel to copper, or even from hard steel to soft
steel, is most unexpected. We are indebted to Mr Perkins for most
of the contrivances which have brought this art at once almost to
perfection. An engraving is first made upon soft steel, which is
hardened by a peculiar process without in the least injuring its
delicacy. A cylinder of soft steel, pressed with great force
against the hardened steel engraving, is now made to roll very
slowly backward and forward over it, thus receiving the design,
but in relief. The cylinder is in its turn hardened without
injury., and if it be slowly rolled to and fro with strong
pressure on successive plates of copper, it will imprint on a
thousand of them a perfect facsimile of the original steel
engraving from which it was made. Thus the number of copies
producible from the same design may be multiplied a
thousand-fold. But even this is very far short of the limits to
which the process may be extended. The hardened steel roller,
bearing the design upon it in relief may be employed to make a
few of its first impressions upon plates of soft steel, and these
being hardened become the representatives of the original
engraving, and may in their turn be made the parents of other
rollers, each generating copperplates like their prototype. The
possible extent to which facsimiles of one original engraving may
thus be multiplied, almost confounds the imagination, and appears
to be for all practical purposes unlimited.

This beautiful art was first proposed by Mr Perkins for the
purpose of rendering the forgery of bank notes a matter of great
difficulty; and there are two principles which peculiarly adapt
it to that object: first, the perfect identity of all the
impressions, so that any variation in the minutest line would at
once cause detection; secondly, that the original plates may be
formed by the united labours of several artists most eminent in
their respective departments; for as only one original of each
design is necessary, the expense, even of the most elaborate
engraving, will be trifling, compared with the multitude of
copies produced from it.

125. It must, however, be admitted that the principle of
copying itself furnishes an expedient for imitating any engraving
or printed pattern, however complicated; and thus presents a
difficulty which none of the schemes devised for the prevention
of forgery appear to have yet effectually obviated. In attempting
to imitate the most perfect banknote, the first process would be
to place it with the printed side downwards upon a stone or other
substance, on which, by passing it through a rolling-press, it
might be firmly fixed. The next object would be to discover some
solvent which should dissolve the paper, but neither affect the
printing-ink, nor injure the stone or substance to which it is
attached. Water does not seem to do this effectually, and perhaps
weak alkaline or acid solutions would be tried. If, however, this
could be fully accomplished, and if the stone or other substance,
used to retain the impression, had those properties which enable
us to print from it, innumerable facsimiles of the note might
obviously be made, and the imitation would be complete. Porcelain
biscuit, which has recently been used with a black lead pencil
for memorandum books, seems in some measure adapted for such
trials, since its porosity may be diminished to any required
extent by regulating the dilution of the glazing.

126. Gold and silver moulding. Many of the mouldings used by
jewellers consist of thin slips of metal, which have received
their form by passing between steel rollers, on which the pattern
is embossed or engraved; thus taking a succession of copies of
the devices intended.

127. Ornamental papers. Sheets of paper coloured or covered
with gold or silver leaf, and embossed with various patterns, are
used for covering books, and for many ornamental purposes. The
figures upon these are produced by the same process, that of
passing the sheets of paper between engraved rollers.


Of copying by stamping

128. This mode of copying is extensively employed in the
arts. It is generally executed by means of large presses worked
with a screw and heavy flywheel. The materials on which the
copies are impressed are most frequently metals, and the process
is sometimes executed when they are hot, and in one case when the
metal is in a state between solidity and fluidity.

129. Coins and medals. The whole of the coins which circulate
as money are produced by this mode of copying. The screw presses
are either worked by manual labour, by water, or by steam power.
The mint which was sent a few years since to Calcutta was capable
of coining 200,000 pieces a day. Medals, which usually have their
figures in higher relief than coins, are produced by similar
means; but a single blow is rarely sufficient to bring them to
perfection, and the compression of the metal which arises from
the first blow renders it too hard to receive many subsequent
blows without injury to the die. It is therefore, after being
struck, removed to a furnace, in which it is carefully heated
red-hot and annealed, after which operation it is again placed
between the dies, and receives additional blows. For medals, on
which the figures are very prominent, these processes must be
repeated many times. One of the largest medals hitherto struck
underwent them nearly a hundred times before it was completed.

130. Ornaments for military accoutrements, and furniture.
These are usually of brass, and are stamped up out of solid or
sheet brass by placing it between dies, and allowing a heavy
weight to drop upon the upper die from a height of from five to
fifteen feet.

131. Buttons and nail heads. Buttons embossed with crests or
other devices are produced by the same means; and some of those
which are plain receive their hemispherical form from the dies in
which they are struck. The heads of several kinds of nails which
are portions of spheres, or polyhedrons, are also formed by these
means.

132. Of a process for copying, called in France clichee. This
curious method of copying by stamping is applied to medals, and
in some cases to forming stereotype plates. There exists a range
of temperature previous to the melting point of several of the
alloys of lead, tin, and antimony, in which the compound is
neither solid, nor yet fluid. In this kind of pasty state it is
placed in a box under a die, which descends upon it with
considerable force. The blow drives the metal into the finest
lines of the die, and the coldness of the latter immediately
solidifies the whole mass. A quantity of the half-melted metal is
scattered in all directions by the blow, and is retained by the
sides of the box in which the process is carried on. The work
thus produced is admirable for its sharpness, but has not the
finished form of a piece just leaving the coining-press: the
sides are ragged, and it must be trimmed, and its thickness
equalized in the lathe.


Of copying by punching

133. This mode of copying consists in driving a steel punch
through the substance to be cut, either by a blow or by pressure.
In some cases the object is to copy the aperture, and the
substance separated from the plate is rejected; in other cases
the small pieces cut out are the objects of the workman's labour.

134. Punching iron plate for boilers. The steel punch used
for this purpose is from three-eighths to three-quarters of an
inch in diameter, and drives out a circular disk from a plate of
iron from one-quarter to five eighths of an inch thick.

135. Punching tinned iron. The ornamental patterns of open
work which decorate the tinned and japanned wares in general use,
are rarely punched by the workman who makes them. In London the
art of punching out these patterns in screw-presses is carried on
as a separate trade; and large quantities of sheet tin are thus
perforated for cullenders, wine-strainers, borders of waiters,
and other similar purposes. The perfection and the precision to
which the art has been carried are remarkable. Sheets of copper,
too, are punched with small holes about the hundredth of an inch
in diameter, in such multitudes that more of the sheet metal is
removed than remains behind; and plates of tin have been
perforated with above three thousand holes in each square inch.

136. The inlaid plates of brass and rosewood, called buhl
work, which ornament our furniture, are, in some instances,
formed by punching; but in this case, both the parts cut out, and
those which remain, are in many cases employed. In the remaining
illustrations of the art of copying by punching, the part made
use of is that which is punched out.

137. Cards for guns. The substitution of a circular disk of
thin card instead of paper, for retaining in its place the charge
of a fowling-piece, is attended with considerable advantage. It
would, however, be of little avail, unless an easy method was
contrived of producing an unlimited number of cards, each exactly
fitting the bore of the barrel. The small steel tool used for
this purpose cuts out innumerable circles similar to its cutting
end, each of which precisely fills the barrel for which it was
designed.

138. Ornaments of gilt paper. The golden stars, leaves, and
other devices, sold in shops for the purpose of ornamenting
articles made of paper and pasteboard, and other fancy works, are
cut by punches of various forms out of sheets of gilt paper.

139. Steel chains. The chain used in connecting the
mainspring and fusee in watches and clocks, is composed of small
pieces of sheet steel, and it is of great importance that each of
these pieces should be of exactly the same size. The links are of
two sorts; one of them consisting of a single oblong piece of
steel with two holes in it, and the other formed by connecting
two of the same pieces of steel, placed parallel to each other,
and at a small distance apart, by two rivets. The two kinds of
links occur alternately in the chain: each end of the single
pieces being placed between the ends of two others, and connected
with them by a rivet passing through all three. If the rivet
holes in the pieces for the double links are not precisely at
equal distances, the chain will not be straight, and will,
consequently, be unfit for its purpose.


Copying with elongation

140. In this species of copying there exists but little
resemblance between the copy and the original. It is the
cross-section only of the thing produced which is similar to the
tool through which it passes. When the substances to be operated
upon are hard, they must frequently pass in succession through
several holes, and it is in some cases necessary to anneal them
at intervals.

141. Wire drawing. The metal to be converted into wire is
made of a cylindrical form, and drawn forcibly through circular
holes in plates of steel: at each passage it becomes smaller.
and, when finished, its section at any point is a precise copy of
the last hole through which it passed. Upon the larger kinds of
wire, fine lines may sometimes be traced, running longitudinally.
these arise from slight imperfections in the holes of the
draw-plates. For many purposes of the arts, wire, the section of
which is square or half round, is required: the same method of
making it is pursued, except that the holes through which it is
drawn are in such cases themselves square, or half-round, or of
whatever other form the wire is required to be. A species of wire
is made, the section of which resembles a star with from six to
twelve rays; this is called pinion wire, and is used by the
clockmakers. They file away all the rays from a short piece,
except from about half an inch near one end: this becomes a
pinion for a clock; and the leaves or teeth are already burnished
and finished, from having passed through the draw-plate.

142. Tube drawing. The art of forming tubes of uniform
diameter is nearly similar in its mode of execution to wire
drawing. The sheet brass is bent round and soldered so as to form
a hollow cylinder; and if the diameter outside is that which is
required to be uniform, it is drawn through a succession of
holes, as in wire drawing: If the inside diameter is to be
uniform, a succession of steel cylinders, called triblets, are
drawn through the brass tube. In making tubes for telescopes, it
is necessary that both the inside and outside should be uniform.
A steel triblet, therefore, is first passed into the tube, which
is then drawn through a succession of holes, until the outside
diameter is reduced to the required size. The metal of which the
tube is formed is condensed between these holes and the steel
cylinder within; and when the latter is withdrawn the internal
surface appears polished. The brass tube is considerably extended
by this process, sometimes even to double its first length.

143. Leaden pipes. Leaden pipes for the conveyance of water
were formerly made by casting; but it has been found that they
can be made both cheaper and better by drawing them through holes
in the manner last described. A cylinder of lead, of five or six
inches in diameter and about two feet long, is cast with a small
hole through its axis, and an iron triblet of about fifteen feet
in length is forced into the hole. It is then drawn through a
series of holes, until the lead is extended upon the triblet from
one end to the other, and is of the proper thickness in
proportion to the size of the pipe.

144. Iron rolling. When cylinders of iron of greater
thickness than wire are required, they are formed by passing
wrought iron between rollers, each of which has sunk in it a
semi-cylindrical groove; and as such rollers rarely touch
accurately, a longitudinal line will usually be observed in the
cylinders so manufactured. Bar iron is thus shaped into all the
various forms of round, square, half-round, oval, etc. in which
it occurs in commerce. A particular species of moulding is thus
made, which resembles, in its section, that part of the frame of
a window which separates two adjacent panes of glass. Being much
stronger than wood, it can be considerably reduced in thickness,
and consequently offers less obstruction to the light; it is much
used for skylights.

145. It is sometimes required that the iron thus produced
should not be of uniform thickness throughout. This is the case
in bars for railroads, where greater depth is required towards
the middle of the rail which is at the greatest distance from the
supports. This form is produced by cutting the groove in the
rollers deeper at those parts where additional strength is
required, so that the hollow which surrounds the roller would, if
it could be unwound, be a mould of the shape the iron is intended
to fit.

146. Vermicelli. The various forms into which this paste is
made are given by forcing it through holes in tin plate. It
passes through them, and appears on the other side in long
strings. The cook makes use of the same method in preparing
butter and ornamental pastry for the table, and the confectioner
in forming cylindrical lozenges of various composition.


Of copying with altered dimensions

147. Of the pentagraph. This mode of copying is chiefly used
for drawings or maps: the instrument is simple; and, although
usually employed in reducing, is capable of enlarging the size of
the copy. An automaton figure, exhibited in London a short time
since, which drew profiles of its visitors, was regulated by a
mechanism on this principle. A small aperture in the wall,
opposite the seat in which the person is placed whose profile is
taken, conceals a camera lucida, which is placed in an adjoining
apartment: and an assistant, by moving a point, connected by a
pentagraph with the hand of the automaton, over the outline of
the head, causes the figure to trace a corresponding profile.

148. By turning. The art of turning might perhaps itself be
classed amongst the arts of copying. A steel axis, called a
mandril, having a pulley attached to the middle of it, is
supported at one end either by a conical point, or by a
cylindrical collar, and at the other end by another collar,
through which it passes. The extremity which projects beyond this
last collar is formed into a screw, by which various instruments,
called chucks, can be attached to it. These chucks are intended
to hold the various materials to be submitted to the operation of
turning, and have a great variety of forms. The mandril with the
chuck is made to revolve by a strap which passes over the pulley
that is attached to it, and likewise over a larger wheel moved
either by the foot, or by its connection with steam or water
power. All work which is executed on a mandril partakes in some
measure of the irregularities in the form of that mandril; and
the perfect circularity of section which ought to exist in every
part of the work, can only be ensured by an equal accuracy in the
mandril and its collar.

149. Rose engine turning. This elegant art depends in a great
measure on copying. Circular plates of metal called rosettes,
having various indentations on the surfaces and edges, are fixed
on the mandril, which admits of a movement either end-wise or
laterally: a fixed obstacle called the 'touch', against which the
rosettes are pressed by a spring, obliges the mandril to follow
their indentations, and thus causes the cutting tool to trace out
the same pattern on the work. The distance of the cutting tool
from the centre being usually less than the radius of the
rosette, causes the copy to be much diminished.

150. Copying dies. A lathe has been long known in France, and
recently been used at the English mint for copying dies. A blunt
point is carried by a very slow spiral movement successively over
every part of the die to be copied, and is pressed by a weight
into all the cavities; while a cutting point connected with it by
the machine traverses the face of a piece of soft steel, in which
it cuts the device of the original die on the same or on a
diminished scale. The degree of excellence of the copy increases
in proportion as it is smaller than the original. The die of a
crown-piece will furnish by copy a very tolerable die for a
sixpence. But the chief use to be expected from this lathe is to
prepare all the coarser parts, and leave only the finer and more
expressive lines for the skill and genius of the artist.

151. Shoe-last making engine. An instrument not very unlike
in principle was proposed for the purpose of making shoe lasts. A
pattern last of a shoe for the right foot was placed in one part
of the apparatus, and when the machine was moved, two pieces of
wood, placed in another part which had been previously adjusted
by screws, were cut into lasts greater or less than the original,
as was desired; and although the pattern was for the right foot,
one of the lasts was for the left, an effect which was produced
by merely interposing a wheel which reversed the motion between
the two pieces of wood to be cut into lasts.

152. Engine for copying busts. Many years since, the late Mr
Watt amused himself with constructing an engine to produce copies
of busts or statues, either of the same size as the original, or
in a diminished proportion. The substances on which he operated
were various, and some of the results were shewn to his friends,
but the mechanism by which they were made has never been
described. More recently, Mr Hawkins, who, nearly at the same
time, had also contrived a similar machine, has placed it in the
hands of an artist, who has made copies in ivory from a variety
of busts. The art of multiplying in different sizes the figures
of the sculptor, aided by that of rendering their acquisition
cheap through the art of casting, promises to give additional
value to his productions, and to diffuse more widely the pleasure
arising from their possession.

153. Screw cutting. When this operation is performed in the
lathe by means of a screw upon the mandril, it is essentially an
art of copying, but it is only the number of threads in a given
length which is copied; the form of the thread, and length as
well as the diameter of the screw to be cut, are entirely
independent of those from which the copy is made. There is
another method of cutting screws in a lathe by means of one
pattern screw, which, being connected by wheels with the mandril,
guides the cutting point. In this process, unless the time of
revolution of the mandril is the same as that of the screw which
guides the cutting point, the number of threads in a given length
will be different. If the mandril move quicker than the cutting
point, the screw which is produced will be finer than the
original; if it move slower, the copy will be more coarse than
the original. The screw thus generated may be finer or coarser--
it may be larger or smaller in diameter--it may have the same or
a greater number of threads than that from which it is copied;
yet all the defects which exist in the original will be
accurately transmitted, under the modified circumstances, to
every individual generated from it.

154. Printing from copper plates with altered dimensions.
Some very singular specimens of an art of copying, not yet made
public, were brought from Paris a few years since. A watchmaker
in that city, of the name of Gonord, had contrived a method by
which he could take from the same copperplate impressions of
different sizes, either larger or smaller than the original
design. Having procured four impressions of a parrot, surrounded
by a circle, executed in this manner, I shewed them to the late
Mr Lowry, an engraver equally distinguished for his skill, and
for the many mechanical contrivances with which he enriched his
art. The relative dimensions of the several impressions were 5.5,
6.3, 8.4, 15.0, so that the largest was nearly three times the
linear size of the smallest; and Mr Lowry assured me, that he was
unable to detect any lines in one which had not corresponding
lines in the others. There appeared to be a difference in the
quantity of ink, but none in the traces of the engraving; and,
from the general appearance, it was conjectured that the largest
but one was the original impression from the copperplate.

The means by which this singular operation was executed have
not been published; but two conjectures were formed at the time
which merit notice. It was supposed that the artist was in
possession of some method of transferring the ink from the lines
of a copperplate to the surface of some fluid, and of
retransferring the impression from the fluid to paper. If this
could be accomplished, the print would, in the first instance, be
of exactly the same size as the copper from which it was derived;
but if the fluid were contained in a vessel having the form of an
inverted cone, with a small aperture at the bottom, the liquid
might be lowered or raised in the vessel by gradual abstraction
or addition through the apex of the cone; in this case, the
surface to which the printing-ink adhered would diminish or
enlarge, and in this altered state the impression might be
retransferred to paper. It must be admitted, that this
conjectural explanation is liable to very considerable
difficulties; for, although the converse operation of taking an
impression from a liquid surface has a parallel in the art of
marbling paper, the possibility of transferring the ink from the
copper to the fluid requires to be proved.

Another and more plausible explanation is founded on the
elastic nature of the compound of glue and treacle, a substance
already in use in transferring engravings to earthenware. It is
conjectured, that an impression from the copperplate is taken
upon a large sheet of this composition; that this sheet is then
stretched in both directions, and that the ink thus expanded is
transferred to paper. If the copy is required to be smaller than
the original, the elastic substance must first be stretched, and
then receive the impression from the copperplate: on removing the
tension it will contract, and thus reduce the size of the design.
It is possible that one transfer may not in all cases suffice; as
the extensibility of the composition of glue and treacle,
although considerable, is still limited. Perhaps sheets of India
rubber of uniform texture and thickness, may be found to answer
better than this composition; or possibly the ink might be
transferred from the copper plate to the surface of a bottle of
this gum, which bottle might, after being expanded by forcing air
into it, give up the enlarged impression to paper. As it would
require considerable time to produce impressions in this manner,
and there might arise some difficulty in making them all of
precisely the same size, the process might be rendered more
certain and expeditious by performing that part of the operation
which depends on the enlargement or diminution of the design only
once; and, instead of printing from the soft substance.
transferring the design from it to stone: thus a considerable
portion of the work would be reduced to an art already well
known, that of lithography. This idea receives some confirmation
from the fact, that in another set of specimens, consisting of a
map of St Petersburgh, of several sizes, a very short line,
evidently an accidental defect, occurs in all the impressions of
one particular size, but not in any of a different size.

155. Machine to produce engraving from medals. An instrument
was contrived, a long time ago, and is described in the Manuel de
Tourneur, by which copperplate engravings are produced from
medals and other objects in relief. The medal and the copper are
fixed on two sliding plates at right angles to each other, so
connected that, when the plate on which the medal is fixed is
raised vertically by a screw, the slide holding the copperplate
is advanced by an equal quantity in the horizontal direction. The
medal is fixed on the vertical slide with its face towards the
copperplate, and a little above it.

A bar, terminating at one end in a tracing point, and at the
other in a short arm, at right angles to the bar, and holding a
diamond point, is placed horizontally above the copper; so that
the tracing point shall touch the medal to which the bar is
perpendicular, and the diamond point shall touch the copperplate
to which the arm is perpendicular.

Under this arrangement, the bar being supposed to move
parallel to itself, and consequently to the copper, if the
tracing point pass over a flat part of the medal, the diamond
point will draw a straight line of equal length upon the copper;
but, if the tracing point pass over any projecting part of the
medal, the deviation from the straight line by the diamond point,
will be exactly equal to the elevation of the corresponding point
of the medal above the rest of the surface. Thus, by the transit
of this tracing point over any line upon the medal, the diamond
will draw upon the copper a section of the medal through that
line.

A screw is attached to the apparatus, so that if the medal be
raised a very small quantity by the screw, the copperplate will
be advanced by the same quantity, and thus a new line of section
may be drawn: and, by continuing this process, the series of
sectional lines on the copper produces the representation of the
medal on a plane: the outline and the form of the figure arising
from the sinuosities of the lines, and from their greater or less
proximity. The effect of this kind of engraving is very striking;
and in some specimens gives a high degree of apparent relief. It
has been practised on plate glass, and is then additionally
curious from the circumstance of the fine lines traced by the
diamond being invisible, except in certain lights.

From this description, it will have been seen that the
engraving on copper must be distorted; that is to say, that the
projection on the copper cannot be the same as that which arises
from a perpendicular projection of each point of the medal upon a
plane parallel to itself. The position of the prominent parts
will be more altered than that of the less elevated; and the
greater the relief of the medal the more distorted will be its
engraved representation. Mr John Bate, son of Mr Bate, of the
Poultry, has contrived an improved machine, for which he has
taken a patent, in which this source of distortion is remedied.
The head, in the title page of the present volume, is copied from
a medal of Roger Bacon, which forms one of a series of medals of
eminent men, struck at the Royal Mint at Munich, and is the first
of the published productions of this new art.(3*)

The inconvenience which arises from too high a relief in the
medal, or in the bust, might be remedied by some mechanical
contrivance, by which the deviation of the diamond point from the
right line (which it would describe when the tracing point
traverses a plane), would be made proportional not to the
elevation of the corresponding point above the plane of the
medal, but to its elevation above some other parallel plane
removed to a fit distance behind it. Thus busts and statues might
be reduced to any required degree of relief.

156. The machine just described naturally suggests other
views which seem to deserve some consideration, and, perhaps,
some experiment. If a medal were placed under the tracing point
of a pentagraph, an engraving tool substituted for the pencil,
and a copperplate in the place of the paper; and if, by some
mechanism, the tracing point, which slides in a vertical plane,
could, as it is carried over the different elevations of the
medal, increase or diminish the depth of the engraved line
proportionally to the actual height of the corresponding point on
the medal, then an engraving would be produced, free at least
from any distortion, although it might be liable to objections of
a different kind. If, by any similar contrivance, instead of
lines, we could make on each point of the copper a dot, varying
in size or depth with the altitude of the corresponding point of
the medal above its plane, than a new species of engraving would
be produced: and the variety of these might again be increased,
by causing the graving point to describe very small circles, of
diameters, varying with the height of the point on the medal
above a given plane; or by making the graving tool consist of
three equidistant points, whose distance increased or diminished
according to some determinate law, dependent on the elevation of
the point represented above the plane of the medal. It would,
perhaps, be difficult to imagine the effects of some of these
kinds of engraving; but they would all possess, in common, the
property of being projections, by parallel lines, of the objects
represented, and the intensity of the shade of the ink would
either vary according to some function of the distance of the
point represented from some given plane, or it would be a little
modified by the distances from the same plane of a few of the
immediately contiguous points.

157. The system of shading maps by means of lines of equal
altitude above the sea bears some analogy to this mode of
representing medals, and if applied to them would produce a
different species of engraved resemblance. The projections on the
plane of the medal, of the section of an imaginary plane, placed
at successive distances above it, with the medal itself, would
produce a likeness of the figure on the medal, in which all the
inclined parts of it would be dark in proportion to their
inclination. Other species of engraving might be conceived by
substituting, instead of the imaginary plane, an imaginary sphere
or other solid, intersecting the figure in the medal.

158. Lace made by caterpillars. A most extraordinary species
of manufacture, which is in a slight degree connected with
copying, has been contrived by an officer of engineers residing
at Munich. It consists of lace, and veils, with open patterns in
them, made entirely by caterpillars. The following is the mode of
proceeding adopted: he makes a paste of the leaves of the plant,
which is the usual food of the species of caterpillar(4*) he
employs, and spreads it thinly over a stone, or other flat
substance. He then, with a camel-hair pencil dipped in olive oil,
draws upon the coating of paste the pattern he wishes the insects
to leave open. This stone is then placed in an inclined position,
and a number of the caterpillars are placed at the bottom. A
peculiar species is chosen, which spins a strong web; and the
animals commencing at the bottom, eat and spin their way up to
the top, carefully avoiding every part touched by the oil, but
devouring all the rest of the paste. The extreme lightness of
these veils, combined with some strength, is truly surprising.
One of them, measuring twenty-six and a half inches by seventeen
inches, weighed only 1.51 grains; a degree of lightness which
will appear more strongly by contrast with other fabrics. One
square yard of the substance of which these veils are made weighs
4 1/3 grains, whilst one square yard of silk gauze weighs 137
grains, and one square yard of the finest patent net weighs 262
1/2 grains. The ladies' coloured muslin dresses, mentioned in the
table subjoined, cost ten shillings per dress, and each weigh six
ounces; the cotton from which they are made weighing nearly six
and two-ninth ounces avoirdupois weight.

Weight of one square yard of each of the following articles(5*)

                                                     Weight of
                                        Weight      cotton used
                             Value    finished of    in waking
                            per yard  one square    one square
 Description of goods       measure     yard            yard

                            s. d.    Troy grains    Troy grains

 Caterpillar veils           --         4 1/3           --
 Silk gauze 3-4 wide        1  0         137            --
 Finest patent net           --       262 1/2           --
 Fine cambric muslin         --          551            --
 6-4ths jaconet muslin      2  0         613           670
 Ladies' coloured muslin dresses 3 0     788           875
 6-4ths cambric             1  2         972          1069
 9-8ths calico              0  9         988          1085
 1/2-yard nankeen           0  8        2240          2432


159. This enumeration, which is far from complete, of the
arts in which copying is the foundation, may be terminated with
an example which has long been under the eye of the reader;
although few, perhaps, are aware of the number of repeated
copyings of which these very pages are the subject.

1. They are copies, by printing, from stereotype plates.

2. These stereotype plates are copied, by the art of casting,
from moulds formed of plaster of Paris.

3. These moulds are themselves copied by casting the plaster
in a liquid state upon the moveable types set up by the
compositor.

[It is here that the union of the intellectual and the
mechanical departments takes place. The mysteries, however, of an
author's copying, form no part of our enquiry, although it may be
fairly remarked, that, in numerous instances, the mental far
eclipses the mechanical copyist.]

4. These moveable types, the obedient messengers of the most
opposite thoughts, the most conflicting theories, are themselves
copies by casting from moulds of copper called matrices.

5. The lower part of those matrices, bearing the impressions
of the letters or characters, are copies, by punching, from steel
punches on which the same characters exist in relief.

6. These steel punches are not themselves entirely exempted
from the great principle of art. Many of the cavities which exist
in them, such as those in the middle of the punches for the
letters a, b, d, e, g, etc., are produced from other steel
punches in which these parts are in relief.

We have thus traced through six successive stages of copying
the mechanical art of printing from stereotype plates: the
principle of copying contributing in this, as in every other
department of manufacture, to the uniformity and the cheapness of
the work produced.

NOTES:

1. The late Mr Lowry.

2. I posses a lithographic reprint of a page of a table, which
appears, from the from of the type, to have been several years
old.

3. The construction of the engraving becomes evident on examining
it with a lens of sufficient power to show the continuity of the
lines.

4. The Phalaena pardilla, which feeds on the Prunus padus.

5. Some of these weights and measures are calculated from a
statement in the Report of the Committee of the House of Commons
on Printed Cotton Goods; and the widths of the pieces there given
are presumed to be the real widths, not those by which they are
called in the retail shops.



Chapter 12

On the Method of Observing Manufactories

160. Having now reviewed the mechanical principles which
regulate the successful application of mechanical science to
great establishments for the production of manufactured goods, it
remains for us to suggest a few enquiries, and to offer a few
observations, to those whom an enlightened curiosity may lead to
examine the factories of this or of other countries.

The remark--that it is important to commit to writing all
information as soon as possible after it is received, especially
when numbers are concerned--applies to almost all enquiries. It
is frequently impossible to do this at the time of visiting an
establishment, although not the slightest jealousy may exist; the
mere act of writing information as it is communicated orally, is
a great interruption to the examination of machinery. In such
cases, therefore, it is advisable to have prepared beforehand the
questions to be asked, and to leave blanks for the answers, which
may be quickly inserted, as, in a multitude of cases, they are
merely numbers. Those who have not tried this plan will be
surprised at the quantity of information which may, through its
means, be acquired, even by a short examination. Each manufacture
requires its own list of questions, which will be better drawn up
after the first visit. The following outline, which is very
generally applicable, may suffice for an illustration; and to
save time, it may be convenient to have it printed; and to bind
up, in the form of a pocket-book, a hundred copies of the
skeleton forms for processes, with about twenty of the general
enquiries.


GENERAL ENQUIRIES


Outlines of a description of any of the mechanical arts ought to
contain information on the following points

Brief sketch of its history, particularly the date of its
invention, and of its introduction into England.

Short reference to the previous states through which the
material employed has passed: the places whence it is procured:
the price of a given quantity.

[The various processes must now be described successively
according to the plan which will be given in (161); after which
the following information should be given.]

Are various kinds of the same article made in one establishment,
or at different ones, and are there differences in the processes?

To what defects are the goods liable?

What substitutes or adulterations are used?

What waste is allowed by the master?

What tests are there of the goodness of the manufactured
articles?

The weight of a given quantity, or number, and a comparison
with that of the raw material?

The wholesale price at the manufactory? (L  s. d.) per (  )

The usual retail price? (L  s. d.)

Who provide tools? Master, or men? Who repair tools? Master,
or men?

What is the expense of the machinery?

What is the annual wear and tear, and what its duration?

Is there any particular trade for making it? Where?

Is it made and repaired at the manufactory?

In any manufactory visited, state the number ( ) of
processes; and of the persons employed in each process; and the
quantity of manufactured produce.

What quantity is made annually in Great Britain?

Is the capital invested in manufactories large or small?

Mention the principal seats of this manufacture in England;
and if it flourishes abroad, the places where it is established.

The duty, excise. or bounty, if any, should be stated, and
any alterations in past years; and also the amount exported or
imported for a series of years.

Whether the same article, but of superior, equal, or inferior
make, is imported?

Does the manufacturer export, or sell, to a middleman, who
supplies the merchant?

To what countries is it chiefly sent? and in what goods are
the returns made?


161. Each process requires a separate skeleton, and the
following outline will be sufficient for many different
manufactories:

  Process ( ) Manufacture ( )
    Place ( ) Name ( )
         date    183


The mode of executing it, with sketches of the tools or
machine if necessary.

The number of persons necessary to attend the machine. Are
the operatives, men ( ) women, ( ) or children? ( ) If mixed,
what are the proportions?

What is the pay of each? (s. d.) (s. d. ) (s. d.) per ( )

What number ( ) of hours do they work per day?

Is it usual, or necessary, to work night and day without
stopping? Is the labour performed by piece--or by day-work?

Who provide tools? Master, or men? Who repair tools? Master,
or men? What degree of skill is required, and how many years' ( )
apprenticeship?

The number of times ( ) the operation is repeated per day or
per hour?

The number of failures ( ) in a thousand?

Whether the workmen or the master loses by the broken or
damaged articles?

What is done with them?

If the same process is repeated several times, state the
diminution or increase of measure, and the loss, if any, at each
repetition.


162. In this skeleton, the answers to the questions are in
some cases printed, as "Who repair the tools?--Masters, Men"; in
order that the proper answer may be underlined with a pencil. In
filling up the answers which require numbers, some care should be
taken: for instance, if the observer stands with his watch in his
hand before a person heading a pin, the workman will almost
certainly increase his speed, and the estimate will be too large.
A much better average will result from enquiring what quantity is
considered a fair day's work. When this cannot be ascertained,
the number of operations performed in a given time may frequently
be counted when the workman is quite unconscious that any person
is observing him. Thus the sound made by the motion of a loom may
enable the observer to count the number of strokes per minute,
even though he is outside the building in which it is contained.
M. Coulomb, who had great experience in making such observations,
cautions those who may repeat his experiments against being
deceived by such circumstances: 'Je prie' (says he) 'ceux qui
voudront les repeter, s'ils n'ont pas le temps de mesurer les
resultats apres plusiers jours d'un travail continu, d'observer
les ouvriers a differentes reprises dans la journee, sans qu'ils
sachent qu'ils sont observes. L'on ne peut trop avertir combien
l'on risque de se tromper en calculant, soit la vitesse, soit le
temps effectif du travail, d'apres une observation de quelques
minutes.' Memoires de l'Institut. vol. II, p. 247. It frequently
happens, that in a series of answers to such questions, there are
some which, although given directly, may also be deduced by a
short calculation from others that are given or known; and
advantage should always be taken of these verifications, in order
to confirm the accuracy of the statements; or, in case they are
discordant, to correct the apparent anomalies. In putting lists
of questions into the hands of a person undertaking to give
information upon any subject, it is in some cases desirable to
have an estimate of the soundness of his judgement. The questions
can frequently be so shaped, that some of them may indirectly
depend on others; and one or two may be inserted whose answers
can be obtained by other methods: nor is this process without its
advantages in enabling us to determine the value of our own
judgement. The habit of forming an estimate of the magnitude of
any object or the frequency of any occurrence, immediately
previous to our applying to it measure or number, tends
materially to fix the attention and to improve the judgement.





Section II

On the domestic and political economy of manufactures



Chapter 13

Distinction Between Making and Manufacturing

163. The economical principles which regulate the application
of machinery, and which govern the interior of all our great
factories, are quite as essential to the prosperity of a great
commercial country, as are those mechanical principles, the
operation of which has been illustrated in the preceding section.

The first object of every person who attempts to make any
article of consumption, is, or ought to be, to produce it in a
perfect form; but in order to secure to himself the greatest and
most permanent profit, he must endeavour, by every means in his
power, to render the new luxury or want which he has created,
cheap to those who consume it. The larger number of purchasers
thus obtained will, in some measure, secure him from the caprices
of fashion, whilst it furnishes a far greater amount of profit,
although the contribution of each individual is diminished. The
importance of collecting data, for the purpose of enabling the
manufacturer to ascertain how many additional customers he will
acquire by a given reduction in the price of the article he
makes, cannot be too strongly pressed upon the attention of those
who employ themselves in statistical enquiries. In some ranks of
society, no diminution of price can bring forward a great
additional number of customers; whilst, amongst other classes, a
very small reduction will so enlarge the sale, as to yield a
considerable increase of profit. Materials calculated to assist
in forming a table of the numbers of persons who possess incomes
of different amount, occur in the 14th Report of the
Commissioners of Revenue Inquiry, which includes a statement of
the amount of personal property proved at the legacy office
during one year; the number of the various classes of testators;
and an account of the number of persons receiving dividends from
funded property, distributed into classes. Such a table, formed
even approximately, and exhibited in the form of a curve, might
be of service.

164. A considerable difference exists between the terms
making and manufacturing. The former refers to the production of
a small, the latter to that of a very large number of
individuals; and the difference is well illustrated in the
evidence, given before the Committee of the House of Commons, on
the Export of Tools and Machinery. On that occasion Mr Maudslay
stated, that he had been applied to by the Navy Board to make
iron tanks for ships, and that he was rather unwilling to do so,
as he considered it to be out of his line of business; however,
he undertook to make one as a trial. The holes for the rivets
were punched by hand-punching with presses, and the 1680 holes
which each tank required cost seven shillings. The Navy Board,
who required a large number, proposed that he should supply forty
tanks a week for many months. The magnitude of the order made it
worth his while to commence manufacture, and to make tools for
the express business. Mr Maudslay therefore offered, if the Board
would give him an order for two thousand tanks, to supply them at
the rate of eighty per week. The order was given: he made tools,
by which the expense of punching the rivet-holes of each tank was
reduced from seven shillings to ninepence; he supplied
ninety-eight tanks a week for six months, and the price charged
for each was reduced from seventeen pounds to fifteen.

165. If, therefore, the maker of an article wish to become a
manufacturer, in the more extended sense of the term, he must
attend to other principles besides those mechanical ones on which
the successful execution of his work depends; and he must
carefully arrange the whole system of his factory in such a
manner, that the article he sells to the public may be produced
at as small a cost as possible. Should he not be actuated at
first by motives so remote, he will, in every highly civilized
country, be compelled, by the powerful stimulus of competition,
to attend to the principles of the domestic economy of
manufactures. At every reduction in price of the commodity he
makes, he will be driven to seek compensation in a saving of
expense in some of the processes; and his ingenuity will be
sharpened in this enquiry by the hope of being able in his turn
to undersell his rivals. The benefit of the improvements thus
engendered is, for a short time, confined to those from whose
ingenuity they derive their origin; but when a sufficient
experience has proved their value, they become generally adopted,
until in their turn they are superseded by other more economical
methods.



Chapter 14

Of Money as a Medium of Exchange

166. In the earlier stages of societies the interchange of
the few commodities required was conducted by barter, but as soon
as their wants became more varied and extensive, the necessity of
having some common measure of the value of all commodities--
itself capable of subdivision--became apparent: thus money was
introduced. In some countries shells have been employed for this
purpose; but civilized nations have, by common consent, adopted
the precious metals.(1*) The sovereign power has, in most
countries, assumed the right of coining; or, in other words, the
right of stamping with distinguishing marks, pieces of metal
having certain forms and weights and a certain degree of
fineness: the marks becoming a guarantee, to the people amongst
whom the money circulates, that each piece is of the required
weight and quality.

The expense of manufacturing gold into coin, and that of the
loss arising from wear, as well as of interest on the capital
invested in it, must either be defrayed by the State, or be
compensated by a small reduction in its weight, and is a far less
cost to the nation than the loss of time and inconvenience which
would arise from a system of exchange or barter.

167. These coins are liable to two inconveniences: they may
be manufactured privately by individuals, of the same quality,
and similarly stamped; or imitations may be made of inferior
metal, or of diminished weight. The first of these inconveniences
would be easily remedied by making the current value of the coin
nearly equal to that of the same weight of the metal; and the
second would be obviated by the caution of individuals in
examining the external characters of each coin, and partly by the
punishment inflicted by the State on the perpetrators of such
frauds.

168. The subdivisions of money vary in different countries,
and much time may be lost by an inconvenient system of division.
The effect is felt in keeping extensive accounts, and
particularly in calculating the interest on loans, or the
discount upon bills of exchange. The decimal system is the best
adapted to facilitate all such calculations; and it becomes an
interesting question to consider whether our own currency might
not be converted into one decimally divided. The great step, that
of abolishing the guinea, has already been taken without any
inconvenience, and but little is now required to render the
change complete.

169. If, whenever it becomes necessary to call in the
half-crowns, a new coin of the value of two shillings were
issued, which should be called by some name implying a unit (a
prince, for instance), we should have the tenth part of a
sovereign. A few years after, when the public were familiar with
this coin, it might be divided into one hundred instead of
ninety-six farthings; and it would then consist of twenty-five
pence, each of which would be four per cent. less in value than
the former penny. The shillings and six-pences being then
withdrawn from circulation, their place might be supplied with
silver coins each worth five of the new pence, and by others of
ten-pence, and of twopence halfpenny; the latter coin, having a
distinct name, would be the tenth part of a prince.

170. The various manufactured commodities, and the various
property possessed by the inhabitants of a country, all become
measured by the standard thus introduced. But it must be observed
that the value of gold is itself variable; and that, like all
other commodities, its price depends on the extent of the demand
compared with that of the supply.

171. As transactions multiply, and the sums to be paid become
large, the actual transfer of the precious metals from one
individual to another is attended with inconvenience and
difficulty, and it is found more convenient to substitute written
promises to pay on demand specified quantities of gold. These
promises are called bank-notes; and when the person or body
issuing them is known to be able to fulfil the pledge, the note
will circulate for a long time before it gets into the hands of
any person who may wish to make use of the gold it represents.
These paper representatives supply the place of a certain
quantity of gold; and, being much cheaper, a large portion of the
expense of a metallic circulation is saved by their employment.

172. As commercial transactions increase, the transfer of
bank-notes is, to a considerable extent, superseded by shorter
processes. Banks are established, into which all monies are paid,
and out of which all payments are made, through written orders
called checks, drawn by those who keep accounts with them. In a
large capital, each bank receives, through its numerous
customers, checks payable by every other; and if clerks were sent
round to receive the amount in banknotes due from each, it would
occupy much time, and be attended with some risk and
inconvenience.

173. Clearing house. In London this is avoided, by making all
checks paid in to bankers pass through what is technically called
The Clearing House. In a large room in Lombard Street, about
thirty clerks from the several London bankers take their
stations, in alphabetical order, at desks placed round the room;
each having a small open box by his side, and the name of the
firm to which he belongs in large characters on the wall above
his head. From time to time other clerks from every house enter
the room, and, passing along, drop into the box the checks due by
that firm to the house from which this distributor is sent. The
clerk at the table enters the amount of the several checks in a
book previously prepared, under the name of the bank to which
they are respectively due.

Four o'clock in the afternoon is the latest hour to which the
boxes are open to receive checks; and at a few minutes before
that time, some signs of increased activity begin to appear in
this previously quiet and business-like scene. Numerous clerks
then arrive, anxious to distribute, up to the latest possible
moment, the checks which have been paid into the houses of their
employers.

At four o'clock all the boxes are removed, and each clerk
adds up the amount of the checks put into his box and payable by
his own to other houses. He also receives another book from his
own house, containing the amounts of the checks which their
distributing clerk has put into the box of every other banker.
Having compared these, he writes out the balances due to or from
his own house, opposite the name of each of the other banks; and
having verified this statement by a comparison with the similar
list made by the clerks of those houses, he sends to his own bank
the general balance resulting from this sheet, the amount of
which, if it is due from that to other houses, is sent back in
bank-notes.

At five o'clock the Inspector takes his seat; when each
clerk, who has upon the result of all the transactions a balance
to pay to various other houses, pays it to the inspector, who
gives a ticket for the amount. The clerks of those houses to whom
money is due, then receive the several sums from the inspector,
who takes from them a ticket for the amount. Thus the whole of
these payments are made by a double system of balance, a very
small amount of bank-notes passing from hand to hand, and
scarcely any coin.

174. It is difficult to form a satisfactory estimate of the
sums which daily pass through this operation: they fluctuate from
two millions to perhaps fifteen. About two millions and a half
may possibly be considered as something like an average,
requiring for its adjustment, perhaps, L200,000 in bank notes and
L20 in specie. By an agreement between the different bankers, all
checks which have the name of any firm written across them must
pass through the clearing house: consequently, if any such check
should be lost, the firm on which it is drawn would refuse to pay
it at the counter; a circumstance which adds greatly to the
convenience of commerce.

The advantage of this system is such, that two meetings a day
have been recently established--one at twelve, the other at
three o'clock; but the payment of balances takes place once only,
at five o'clock.

If all the private banks kept accounts with the Bank of
England, it would be possible to carry on the whole of these
transactions with a still smaller quantity of circulating medium.

175. In reflecting on the facility with which these vast
transactions are accomplished--supposing, for the sake of
argument, that they form only the fourth part of the daily
transactions of the whole community--it is impossible not to be
struck with the importance of interfering as little as possible
with their natural adjustment. Each payment indicates a transfer
of property made for the benefit of both parties; and if it were
possible, which it is not, to place, by legal or other means,
some impediment in the way which only amounted to one-eighth per
cent, such a species of friction would produce a useless
expenditure of nearly four millions annually: a circumstance
which is deserving the attention of those who doubt the good
policy of the expense incurred by using the precious metals for
one portion of the currency of the country.

176. One of the most obvious differences between a metallic
and a paper circulation is, that the coin can never, by any panic
or national danger, be reduced below the value of bullion in
other civilized countries; whilst a paper currency may, from the
action of such causes, totally lose its value. Both metallic and
paper money, it is true, may be depreciated, but with very
different effects.

1. Depreciation of coin. The state may issue coin of the same
nominal value, but containing only half the original quantity of
gold, mixed with some cheap alloy; but every piece so issued
bears about with it internal evidence of the amount of the
depreciation: it is not necessary that every successive
proprietor should analyse the new coin; but a few having done so,
its intrinsic worth becomes publicly known. Of course the coin
previously in circulation is now more valuable as bullion, and
quickly disappears. All future purchases adjust themselves to the
new standard, and prices are quickly doubled; but all past
contracts also are vitiated, and all persons to whom money is
owing, if compelled to receive payment in the new coin, are
robbed of one-half of their debt, which is confiscated for the
benefit of the debtor.

2. Depreciation of paper. The depreciation of paper money
follows a different course. If, by any act of the Government
paper is ordained to be a legal tender for debts, and, at the
same time, ceases to be exchangeable for coin, those who have
occasion to purchase of foreigners, who are not compelled to take
the notes, will make some of their payments in gold; and if the
issue of paper, unchecked by the power of demanding the gold it
represents, be continued, the whole of the coin will soon
disappear. But the public, who are obliged to take the notes, are
unable, by any internal evidence, to detect the extent of their
depreciation; it varies with the amount in circulation, and may
go on till the notes shall be worth little more than the paper on
which they are printed. During the whole of this time every
creditor is suffering to an extent which he cannot measure; and
every bargain is rendered uncertain in its advantage, by the
continually changing value of the medium through which it is
conducted. This calamitous course has actually been run in
several countries: in France, it reached nearly its extreme limit
during the existence of assignats. We have ourselves experienced
some portion of the misery it creates; but by a return to sounder
principles, have happily escaped the destruction and ruin which
always attends the completion of that career.

177. Every person in a civilized country requires, according
to his station in life, the use of a certain quantity of money,
to make the ordinary purchases of the articles which he consumes.
The same individual pieces of coin, it is true, circulate again
and again, in the same district: the identical piece of silver,
received by the workman on Saturday night, passing through the
hands of the butcher, the baker, and the small tradesman, is,
perhaps, given by the latter to the manufacturer in exchange for
his check, and is again paid into the hands of the workman at the
end of the succeeding week. Any deficiency in this supply of
money is attended with considerable inconvenience to all parties.
If it be only in the smaller coins, the first effect is a
difficulty in procuring small change; then a disposition in the
shopkeepers to refuse change unless a purchase to a certain
amount be made; and, finally, a premium in money will be given
for changing the larger denominations of coin.

Thus money itself varies in price, when measured by other
money in larger masses: and this effect takes place whether the
circulating medium is metallic or of paper. These effects have
constantly occurred, and particularly during the late war; and,
in order to relieve it, silver tokens for various sums were
issued by the Bank of England.

The inconvenience and loss arising from a deficiency of small
money fall with greatest weight on the classes whose means are
least; for the wealthier buyers can readily procure credit for
their small purchases, until their bill amounts to one of the
larger coins.

178. As money, when kept in a drawer, produces nothing, few
people, in any situation of life, will keep, either in coin or in
notes, more than is immediately necessary for their use; when,
therefore, there are no profitable modes of employing money, a
superabundance of paper will return to the source from whence it
issued, and an excess of coin will be converted into bullion and
exported.

179. Since the worth of all property is measured by money, it
is obviously conducive to the general welfare of the community,
that fluctuations in its value should be rendered as small and as
gradual as possible.

The evils which result from sudden changes in the value of
money will perhaps become more sensible, if we trace their
effects in particular instances. Assuming, as we are quite at
liberty to do, an extreme case, let us suppose three persons,
each possessing a hundred pounds: one of these, a widow advanced
in years, and who, by the advice of her friends, purchases with
that sum an annuity of twenty pounds a year during her life: and
let the two others be workmen, who, by industry and economy, have
each saved a hundred pounds out of their wages; both these latter
persons proposing to procure machines for calendering, and to
commence that business. One of these invests his money in a
savings' bank; intending to make his own calendering machine, and
calculating that he shall expend twenty pounds in materials, and
the remaining eighty in supporting himself and in paying the
workmen who assist him in constructing it. The other workman,
meeting with a machine which he can buy for two hundred pounds,
agrees to pay for it a hundred pounds immediately, and the
remainder at the end of a twelvemonth. Let us now imagine some
alteration to take place in the currency, by which it is
depreciated one-half: prices soon adjust themselves to the new
circumstances, and the annuity of the widow, though nominally of
the same amount, will, in reality, purchase only half the
quantity of the necessaries of life which it did before. The
workman who had placed his money in the savings' bank, having
perhaps purchased ten pounds' worth of materials, and expended
ten pounds in labour applied to them, now finds himself, by this
alteration in the currency, possessed nominally of eighty pounds,
but in reality of a sum which will purchase only half the labour
and materials required to finish his machine; and he can neither
complete it, from want of capital, nor dispose of what he has
already done in its unfinished state for the price it has cost
him. In the meantime, the other workman, who had incurred a debt
of a hundred pounds in order to complete the purchase of his
calendering machine, finds that the payments he receives for
calendering, have, like all other prices, doubled, in consequence
of the depreciation of the currency; and he has therefore, in
fact, obtained his machine for one hundred and fifty pounds.
Thus, without any fault or imprudence, and owing to circumstances
over which they have no control, the widow is reduced almost to
starve; one workman is obliged to renounce, for several years,
his hope of becoming a master; and another, without any superior
industry or skill, but in fact, from having made, with reference
to his circumstances, rather an imprudent bargain, finds himself
unexpectedly relieved from half his debt, and the possessor of a
valuable source of profit; whilst the former owner of the
machine, if he also has invested the money arising from its sale
in the savings' bank, finds his property suddenly reduced
one-half.

180. These evils, to a greater or less extent, attend every
change in the value of the currency; and the importance of
preserving it as far as possible unaltered in value, cannot be
too strongly impressed upon all classes of the community.

NOTES:

1. In Russia platinum has been employed for coin; and it
possesses a peculiarity which deserves notice. Platinum cannot be
melted in our furnaces, and is chiefly valuable in commerce when
in the shape of ingots, from which it may be forged into useful
forms. But when a piece of platinum is cut into two parts, it
cannot easily be reunited except by means of a chemical process,
in which both parts are dissolved in an acid. Hence, when
platinum coin is too abundant, it cannot, like gold, be reduced
into masses by melting, but must pass through an expensive
process to render it useful.



Chapter 15

On the Influence of Verification on Price

181. The money price of an article at any given period is
usually stated to depend upon the proportion between the supply
and the demand. The average price of the same article during a
long period, is said to depend, ultimately, on the power of
producing and selling it with the ordinary profits of capital.
But these principles, although true in their general sense, are
yet so often modified by the influence of others, that it becomes
necessary to examine a little into the disturbing forces.

182. With respect to the first of these propositions, it may
be observed, that the cost of any article to the purchaser
includes, besides the ratio of the supply to the demand, another
element, which, though often of little importance, is, in many
cases, of great consequence. The cost, to the purchaser, is the
price he pays for any article, added to the cost of verifying the
fact of its having that degree of goodness for which he
contracts. In some cases the goodness of the article is evident
on mere inspection: and in those cases there is not much
difference of price at different shops. The goodness of loaf
sugar, for instance, can be discerned almost at a glance; and the
consequence is, that the price is so uniform, and the profit upon
it so small, that no grocer is at all anxious to sell it; whilst,
on the other hand, tea, of which it is exceedingly difficult to
judge, and which can be adulterated by mixture so as to deceive
the skill even of a practised eye, has a great variety of
different prices, and is that article which every grocer is most
anxious to sell to his customers.

The difficulty and expense of verification are, in some
instances, so great, as to justify the deviation from
well-established principles. Thus it is a general maxim that
Government can purchase any article at a cheaper rate than that
at which they can manufacture it themselves. But it has
nevertheless been considered more economical to build extensive
flour-mills (such are those at Deptford), and to grind their own
corn, than to verify each sack of purchased flour, and to employ
persons in devising methods of detecting the new modes of
adulteration which might be continually resorted to.

183. Some years since, a mode of preparing old clover and
trefoil seeds by a process called doctoring, became so prevalent
as to excite the attention of the House of Commons. It appeared
in evidence before a committee, that the old seed of the white
clover was doctored by first wetting it slightly, and then drying
it with the fumes of burning sulphur, and that the red clover
seed had its colour improved by shaking it in a sack with a small
quantity of indigo; but this being detected after a time, the
doctors then used a preparation of logwood, fined by a little
copperas, and sometimes by verdigris; thus at once improving the
appearance of the old seed, and diminishing, if not destroying,
its vegetative power already enfeebled by age. Supposing no
injury had resulted to good seed so prepared, it was proved that
from the improved appearance, the market price would be enhanced
by this process from five to twenty-five shillings a hundred
weight. But the greatest evil arose from the circumstance of
these processes rendering old and worthless seed equal in
appearance to the best. One witness had tried some doctored seed,
and found that not above one grain in a hundred grew, and that
those which did vegetate died away afterwards; whilst about
eighty or ninety per cent of good seed usually grows. The seed so
treated was sold to retail dealers in the country, who of course
endeavoured to purchase at the cheapest rate, and from them it
got into the hands of the farmers; neither of these classes being
capable of distinguishing the fraudulent from the genuine seed.
Many cultivators, in consequence, diminished their consumption of
the article; and others were obliged to pay a higher price to
those who had skill to distinguish the mixed seed, and who had
integrity and character to prevent them from dealing in it.

184. In the Irish flax trade, a similar example of the high
price paid for verification occurs. It is stated in the report of
the committee, "That the natural excellent quality of Irish flax,
as contrasted with foreign or British, has been admitted." Yet
from the evidence before that committee it appears that Irish
flax sells, in the market, from 1d. to 2d. per pound less than
other flax of equal or inferior quality. Part of this difference
of price arises from negligence in its preparation, but a part
also from the expense of ascertaining that each parcel is free
from useless matter to add to its weight: this appears from the
evidence of Mr J. Corry, who was, during twenty-seven years,
Secretary to the Irish Linen-Board:--

"The owners of the flax, who are almost always people in the lower
classes of life, believe that they can best advance their own
interests by imposing on the buyers. Flax being sold by weight,
various expedients are used to increase it; and every expedient
is injurious, particularly the damping of it; a very common
practice, which makes the flax afterwards heat. The inside of
every bundle (and the bundles all vary in bulk) is often full of
pebbles, or dirt of various kinds, to increase the weight. In
this state it is purchased, and exported to Great Britain. The
natural quality of Irish flax is admitted to be not inferior to
that produced by any foreign country; and yet the flax of every
foreign country, imported into Great Britain, obtains a
preference amongst the purchasers, because the foreign flax is
brought to the British market in a cleaner and more regular
state. The extent and value of the sales of foreign flax in Great
Britain can be seen by reference to the public accounts; and I am
induced to believe, that Ireland, by an adequate extension of her
flax tillage, and having her flax markets brought under good
regulations, could, without encroaching in the least degree upon
the quantity necessary for her home consumption, supply the whole
of the demand of the British market, to the exclusion of the
foreigners."

185. The lace trade affords other examples; and, in enquiring
into the complaints made to the House of Commons by the framework
knitters, the committee observe, that, "It is singular that the
grievance most complained of one hundred and fifty years ago,
should, in the present improved state of the trade, be the same
grievance which is now most complained of: for it appears, by the
evidence given before your committee, that all the witnesses
attribute the decay of the trade more to the making of fraudulent
and bad articles, than to the war, or to any other cause." And it
is shewn by the evidence, that a kind of lace called "single-press"
was manufactured, which, although good to the eye, became nearly
spoiled in washing by the slipping of the threads; that not one
person in a thousand could distinguish the difference between
"single-press" and "double-press" lace; and that, even workmen and
manufacturers were obliged to employ a magnifying glass for that
purpose; and that, in another similar article, called "warp lace,"
such aid was essential. It was also stated by one witness, that

"The trade had not yet ceased, excepting in those places where the
fraud had been discovered; and from those places no orders are
now sent for any sort of Nottingham lace, the credit being
totally ruined."

186. In the stocking trade similar frauds have been practised. It
appeared in evidence, that stockings were made of uniform width
from the knee down to the ankle, and being wetted and stretched
on frames at the calf, they retained their shape when dry, but
that the purchaser could not discover the fraud until, after the
first washing, the stockings hung like bags about his ankles.

187. In the watch trade the practice of deceit, in forging
the marks and names of respectable makers, has been carried to a
great extent both by natives and foreigners; and the effect upon
our export trade has been most injurious, as the following
extract from the evidence before a committee of the House of
Commons will prove:--

"Question. How long have you been in the trade?
Answer. Nearly thirty years.
Question. The trade is at present much depressed?
Answer. Yes, sadly.
Question. What is your opinion of the cause of that distress?
Answer. I think it is owing to a number of watches that have been
made so exceedingly bad that they will hardly look at them in the
foreign markets; all with a handsome outside show, and the works
hardly fit for anything.
Question. Do you mean to say, that all the watches made in this
country are of that description?
Answer. No; only a number which are made up by some of the Jews,
and other low manufacturers. I recollect something of the sort
years ago, of a falloff of the East India work, owing to there
being a number of handsome-looking watches sent out, for
instance, with hands on and figures, as if they shewed seconds,
and had not any work regular to shew the seconds: the hand went
round, but it was not regular.
Question. They had no perfect movements?
Answer. No, they had not; that was a long time since, and we had
not any East India work for a long time afterwards."

In the home market, inferior but showy watches are made at a
cheap rate, which are not warranted by the maker to go above half
an hour; about the time occupied by the Jew pedlar in deluding
his country customer.

188. The practice, in retail linen-drapers' shops, of calling
certain articles yard wide when the real width is perhaps, only
seven-eighths or three-quarters, arose at first from fraud, which
being detected, custom was pleaded in its defence: but the result
is, that the vender is constantly obliged to measure the width of
his goods in the customer's presence. In all these instances the
object of the seller is to get a higher price than his goods
would really produce if their quality were known; and the
purchaser, if not himself a skilful judge (which rarely happens
to be the case), must pay some person, in the shape of an
additional money price, who has skill to distinguish, and
integrity to furnish, articles of the quality agreed on. But as
the confidence of persons in their own judgement is usually
great, large numbers will always flock to the cheap dealer, who
thus, attracting many customers from the honest tradesman,
obliges him to charge a higher price for his judgement and
character than, without such competition, he could afford to do.

189. There are few things which the public are less able to
judge of than the quality of drugs; and when these are compounded
into medicines it is scarcely possible, even for medical men, to
decide whether pure or adulterated ingredients have been
employed. This circumstance, concurring with the present
injudicious mode of paying for medical assistance, has produced a
curious effect on the price of medicines. Apothecaries, instead
of being paid for their services and skill, are remunerated by
being allowed to place a high charge upon their medicines, which
are confessedly of very small pecuniary value. The effect of such
a system is an inducement to prescribe more medicine than is
necessary; and in fact, even with the present charges, the
apothecary, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, cannot be
fairly remunerated unless the patient either takes, or pays for,
more physic than he really requires. The apparent extravagance of
the charge of eighteen pence for a two-ounce phial(1*) of
medicine, is obvious to many who do not reflect on the fact that
a great part of the charge is, in reality, payment for the
exercise of professional skill. As the same charge is made by the
apothecary, whether he attends the patient or merely prepares the
prescription of a physician, the chemist and druggist soon
offered to furnish the same commodity at a greatly diminished
price. But the eighteen pence charged by the apothecary might
have been fairly divided into two parts, three pence for medicine
and bottle, and fifteen pence for attendance. The chemist,
therefore, who never attends his customers, if he charges only a
shilling for the same medicine, realizes a profit of 200 or 300
per cent upon its value. This enormous profit has called into
existence a multitude of competitors; and in this instance the
impossibility of verifying has, in a great measure, counteracted
the beneficial effects of competition. The general adulteration
of drugs, even at the extremely high price at which they are
retailed as medicine, enables those who are supposed to sell them
in an unadulterated state to make large profits, whilst the same
evil frequently disappoints the expectation, and defeats the
skill, of the most eminent physician.

It is difficult to point out a remedy for this evil without
suggesting an almost total change in the system of medical
practice. If the apothecary were to charge for his visits, and to
reduce his medicines to one-fourth or one-fifth of their present
price, he would still have an interest in procuring the best
drugs, for the sake of his own reputation or skill. Or if the
medical attendant, who is paid more highly for his time, were to
have several pupils, he might himself supply the medicines
without a specific charge, and his pupils would derive
improvement from compounding them, as well as from examining the
purity of the drugs he would purchase. The public would gain
several advantages by this arrangement. In the first place, it
would be greatly for the interest of the medical practitioner to
have the best drugs; it would be in his interest also not to give
more physic than needful; and it would enable him, through some
of his more advanced pupils, to watch more frequently the changes
of any malady.

190. There are many articles of hardware which it is
impossible for the purchaser to verify at the time of purchase,
or even afterwards, without defacing them. Plated harness and
coach furniture may be adduced as examples: these are usually of
wrought iron covered with silver, owing their strength to the one
and a certain degree of permanent beauty to the other metal. Both
qualities are, occasionally, much impaired by substituting cast-
for wrought-iron, and by plating with soft solder (tin and lead)
instead of with hard solder (silver and brass). The loss of
strength is the greatest evil in this case; for cast iron, though
made for this purpose more tough than usual by careful annealing,
is still much weaker than wrought-iron, and serious accidents
often arise from harness giving way. In plating with soft
solder, a very thin plate of silver is made to cover the iron,
but it is easily detached, particularly by a low degree of heat.
Hard soldering gives a better coat of silver, which is very
firmly attached, and is not easily injured unless by a very high
degree of heat. The inferior can be made to look nearly as well
as the better article, and the purchaser can scarcely discover
the difference without cutting into it.

191. The principle that price, at any moment, is dependent on
the relation of the supply to the demand, is true to the full
extent only when the whole supply is in the hands of a very large
number of small holders, and the demand is caused by the wants of
another set of persons, each of whom requires only a very small
quantity. And the reason appears to be, that it is only in such
circumstances that a uniform average can be struck between the
feelings, the passions, the prejudices, the opinions, and the
knowledge, of both parties. If the supply, or present stock in
hand, be entirely in the possession of one person, he will
naturally endeavour to put such a price upon it as shall produce
by its sale the greatest quantity of money; but he will be guided
in this estimate of the price at which he will sell, both by the
knowledge that increased price will cause a diminished
consumption, and by the desire to realize his profit before a new
supply shall reach the market from some other quarter. If,
however, the same stock is in the hands of several dealers, there
will be an immediate competition between them, arising partly
from their different views of the duration of the present state
of supply, and partly from their own peculiar circumstances with
respect to the employment of their capital.

192. The expense of ascertaining that the price charged is
that which is legally due is sometimes considerable. The
inconvenience which this verification produces in the case of
parcels sent by coaches is very great. The time lost in
recovering an overcharge generally amounts to so many times the
value of the sum recovered, that it is but rarely resorted to. It
seems worthy of consideration whether it would not be a
convenience to the public if government were to undertake the
general conveyance of parcels somewhat on the same system with
that on which the post is now conducted. The certainty of their
delivery, and the absence of all attempt at overcharge, would
render the prohibition of rival carriers unnecessary. Perhaps an
experiment might be made on this subject by enlarging the weight
allowed to be sent by the two-penny post, and by conveying works
in sheets by the general post.

This latter suggestion would be of great importance to
literature, and consequently to the circulation of knowledge. As
the post-office regulations stand at present, it constantly
happens that persons who have an extensive reputation for
science, receive by post, from foreign countries, works, or parts
of works, for which they are obliged to pay a most extravagant
rate of postage, or else refuse to take in some interesting
communication. In France and Germany, printed sheets of paper are
forwarded by post at a very moderate expense, and it is fit that
the science and literature of England should be equally favoured.

193. It is important, if possible, always to connect the name
of the workman with the work he has executed: this secures for
him the credit or the blame he may justly deserve; and
diminishes, in some cases, the necessity of verification. The
extent to which this is carried in literary works, published in
America, is remarkable. In the translation of the Mecanique
Celeste by Mr Bowditch, not merely the name of the printer, but
also those of the compositors, are mentioned in the work.

194. Again, if the commodity itself is of a perishable
nature, such, for example, as a cargo of ice imported into the
port of London from Norway a few summers since, then time will
supply the place of competition; and, whether the article is in
the possession of one or of many persons, it will scarcely reach
a monopoly price. The history of cajeput oil during the last few
months, offers a curious illustration of the effect of opinion
upon price. In July of last year, 1831, cajeput oil was sold,
exclusive of duty, at 7 d. per ounce. The disease which had
ravaged the East was then supposed to be approaching our shores,
and its proximity created alarm. At this period, the oil in
question began to be much talked of, as a powerful remedy in that
dreadful disorder; and in September it rose to the price of 3s.
and 4s. the ounce. In October there were few or no sales: but in
the early part of November, the speculations in this substance
reached their height, and between the 1st and the 15th it
realized the following prices: 3s. 9d., 5s., 6s. 6d., 7s. 6d.,
8s., 9s., 10s., 10s. 6d., 11s. After 15 November, the holders of
cajeput oil were anxious to sell at much lower rates; and in
December a fresh arrival was offered by public sale at 5s., and
withdrawn, being sold afterwards, as it was understood, by
private contract, at 4s. or 4s. 6d. per oz. Since that time, 1s.
6d. and 1s. have been realized; and a fresh arrival, which is
daily expected (March, 1832) will probably reduce it below the
price of July. Now it is important to notice, that in November,
the time of greatest speculation, the quantity in the market was
held by few persons, and that it frequently changed hands, each
holder being desirous to realize his profit. The quantity
imported since that time has also been considerable.(2*)

195. The effect of the equalization of price by an increased
number of dealers, may be observed in the price of the various
securities sold at the Stock Exchange. The number of persons who
deal in the 3 per cent stock being large, any one desirous of
selling can always dispose of his stock at one-eighth per cent
under the market price; but those who wish to dispose of bank
stock, or of any other securities of more limited circulation,
are obliged to make a sacrifice of eight or ten times this amount
upon each hundred pounds value.

196. The frequent speculations in oil, tallow, and other
commodities, which must occur to the memory of most of my
readers, were always founded on the principle of purchasing up
all the stock on hand, and agreeing for the purchase of the
expected arrivals; thus proving the opinion of capitalists to be,
that a larger average price may be procured by the stock being
held by few persons.

NOTES:

1. Apothecaries frequently purchase these phials at the old
bottle warehouses at ten shillings per gross; so that when their
servant has washed them, the cost of the phial is nearly one
penny.

2. I have understood that the price of camphor, at the same time,
suffered similar changes.



Chapter 16

On the Influence of Durability on Price

197. Having now considered the circumstances that modify what
may be called the momentary amount of price, we must next examine
a principle which seems to have an effect on its permanent
average. The durability of any commodity influences its cost in a
permanent manner. We have already stated that what may be called
the momentary price of any commodity depends upon the proportion
existing between the supply and demand, and also upon the cost of
verification. The average price, during a long period, will
depend upon the labour required for producing and bringing it to
market, as well as upon the average supply and demand; but it
will also be influenced by the durability of the article
manufactured.

Many things in common use are substantially consumed in
using: a phosphorus match, articles of food, and a cigar, are
examples of this description. Some things after use become
inapplicable to their former purposes, as paper which has been
printed upon: but it is yet available for the cheesemonger or the
trunk-maker. Some articles, as pens, are quickly worn out by use;
and some are still valuable after a long continued wear. There
are others, few perhaps in number, which never wear out; the
harder precious stones, when well cut and polished, are of this
later class: the fashion of the gold or silver mounting in which
they are set may vary with the taste of the age, and such
ornaments are constantly exposed for sale as second-hand, but the
gems themselves, when removed from their supports, are never so
considered. A brilliant which has successively graced the necks
of a hundred beauties, or glittered for a century upon patrician
brows, is weighed by the diamond merchant in the same scale with
another which has just escaped from the wheel of the lapidary,
and will be purchased or sold by him at the same price per carat.
The great mass of commodities is intermediate in its character
between these two extremes, and the periods of respective
duration are very various. It is evident that the average price
of those things which are consumed in the act of using them, can
never be less than that of the labour of bringing them to market.
They may for a short time be sold for less, but under such
circumstances their production must soon cease altogether. On the
other hand, if an article never wears out, its price may continue
permanently below the cost of the labour expended in producing
it; and the only consequence will be, that no further production
will take place: its price will continue to be regulated by the
relation of the supply to the demand; and should that at any
aftertime rise, for a considerable period, above the cost of
production, it will be again produced.

198. Articles become old from actual decay, or the wearing
out of their parts; from improved modes of constructing them; or
from changes in their form and fashion, required by the varying
taste of the age. In the two latter cases, their utility is but
little diminished; and, being less sought after by those who have
hitherto employed them, they are sold at a reduced price to a
class of society rather below that of their former possessors.
Many articles of furniture, such as well-made tables and chairs,
are thus found in the rooms of those who would have been quite
unable to have purchased them when new; and we find constantly,
even in the houses of the more opulent, large looking-glasses
which have passed successively through the hands of several
possessors, changing only the fashion of their frames; and in
some instances even this alteration is omitted, an additional
coat of gilding saving them from the character of being
second-hand. Thus a taste for luxuries is propagated downwards in
society', and, after a short period, the numbers who have
acquired new wants become sufficient to excite the ingenuity of
the manufacturer to reduce the cost of supplying them, whilst he
is himself benefited by the extended scale of demand.

199. There is a peculiarity in looking-glasses with reference
to the principle just mentioned. The most frequent occasion of
injury to them arises from accidental violence; and the
peculiarity is, that, unlike most other articles, when broken
they are still of some value. If a large mirror is accidentally
cracked, it is immediately cut into two or more smaller ones,
each of which may be perfect. If the degree of violence is so
great as to break it into many fragments, these smaller pieces
may be cut into squares for dressing-glasses; and if the
silvering is injured, it can either be resilvered or used as
plate-glass for glazing windows. The addition from our
manufactories to the stock of plate-glass in the country is
annually about two hundred and fifty thousand square feet. It
would be very difficult to estimate the quantity annually
destroyed or exported, but it is probably small; and the effect
of these continual additions is seen in the diminished price and
increased consumption of the article. Almost all the better order
of shop fronts are now glazed with it. If it were quite
indestructible, the price would continually diminish; and unless
an increased demand arose from new uses, or from a greater number
of customers, a single manufactory, unchecked by competition,
would ultimately be compelled to shut up, driven out of the
market by the permanance of its own productions.

200. The metals are in some degree permanent, although
several of them are employed in such forms that they are
ultimately lost.

Copper is a metal of which a great proportion returns to use:
a part of that employed in sheathing ships and covering houses is
lost from corrosion; but the rest is generally remelted. Some is
lost in small brass articles, and some is consumed in the
formation of salts, Roman vitriol (sulphate of copper), verdigris
(acetate of copper), and verditer.

Gold is wasted in gilding and in embroidering; but a portion
of this is recovered by burning the old articles. Some portion is
lost by the wear of gold, but, upon the whole, it possesses
considerable permanence.

Iron. A proportion of this metal is wasted by oxidation, in
small nails, in fine wire; by the wear of tools, and of the tire
of wheels, and by the formation of some dyes: but much, both of
cast- and of wrought-iron, returns to use.

Lead is wasted in great quantities. Some portion of that
which is used in pipes and in sheets for covering roofs returns
to the melting-pot; but large quantities are consumed in the form
of small shot, or sometimes in that of musket balls, litharge,
and red lead, for white and red paints, for glass-making, for
glazing pottery, and for sugar of lead (acetate of lead).

Silver is rather a permanent metal. Some portion is consumed
in the wear of coin, in that of silver plate, and a portion in
silvering and embroidering.

Tin. The chief waste of this metal arises from tinned iron;
some is lost in solder and in solutions for the dyers.



Chapter 17

Of Price as Measured by Money

201. The money price at which an article sells furnishes us
with comparatively little information respecting its value, if we
compare distant intervals of time and different countries; for
gold and silver, in which price is usually measured, are
themselves subject, like all other commodities, to changes in
value; nor is there any standard to which these variations can be
referred. The average price of a certain quality of different
manufactured articles, or of raw produce, has been suggested as a
standard; but a new difficulty then presents itself; for the
improved methods of producing such articles render their money
price extremely variable within very limited periods. The annexed
table will afford a striking instance of this kind of change
within a period of only twelve years.

 Prices of the following articles at Birmingham, in the
undermentioned years

 Description 1818 1824 1828 1830
 s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d.
 Anvils cwt 25 0 20 0 16 0 13 0
 Awls, polished, Liverpool gross 2 6 2 0 1 6 1 2
 Bed-screws, 6 inches long gross 18 0 15 0 6 0 5 0
 Bits, tinned. for bridles doz. 5 0 5 0 3 3 2 6
 Bolts for doors, 6 inches doz. 6 0 5 0 2 3 1 6
 Braces for carpenters, with 12 bits set 9 0 4 0 4 2 3 5
 Buttons, for coats gross 4 6 6 3 3 0 2 2
 Buttons, small, for waistcoats gross 2 6 2 0 1 2 0 8
 Candlesticks, 6 in., brass pair 2 1 1 2 0 1 7 1 2
 Curry-combs, six barred doz. 2 9 2 6 1 5 0 1 1
 Frying-pans cwt 25 0 21 0 18 0 16 0
 Gun-locks, single roller each 6 0 5 2 1 10 1 6
 Hammers. shoe, No. 0 doz. 6 9 3 9 3 0 2 9



Description 1818 1824 1828 1830
 s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d.
 Hinges, cast-butts, 1 inch doz. 0 10 0 71/2 0 31/4 0 21/4
 Knobs, brass, 2 inches for commodes doz. 4 0 3 6 1 6 1 2
 Latches for doors, bright thumb doz. 2 3 2 2 1 0 0 9
 Locks for doors, iron rim, 6 inches doz. 38 0 32 0 15 0 13 6
 Sad-irons and other castings cwt 22 6 20 0 14 0 11 6
 Shovel and tongs, fire-irons pair 1 0 1 0 0 9 0 6
 Spoons, tinned table gross 17 6 15 0 10 0 7 0
 Stirrups, plated pair 4 6 3 9 1 6 1 1
 Trace-chains cwt 28 0 25 0 19 6 16 6
 Trays, japanned tea, 30 inches each 4 6 3 0 2 0 1 5
 Vices for blacksmiths cwt 30 0 28 0 22 0 19 6
 Wire, brass lb. 1 10 1 4 1 0 0 9
 --, iron, No. 6 bund. 16 0 13 0 9 0 7 0


202. I have taken some pains to assure myself of the accuracy
of the above table: at different periods of the years quoted the
prices may have varied; but I believe it may be considered as a
fair approximation. In the course of my enquiries I have been
favoured with another list, in which many of the same articles
occur, but in this last instance the prices quoted are separated
by an interval of twenty years. It is extracted from the books of
a highly respectable house at Birmingham; and the prices confirm
the accuracy of the former table, so far as they relate to the
articles which are found in that list.

 Prices of 1812 and 1832
 Reduction
 per cent in
 price of
 Description 1812 1832 1812
 s. d. s. d.

 Anvils cwt 25 0 14 0 44
 Awls, Liverpool blades gross 3 6 1 0 71
 Candlesticks, iron, plain 3 103/4 2 31/2 41
 screwed 6 41/2 3 9 41
 Bed screws, 6 inch square head gross 7 6 4 6 40
 flat head gross 8 6 4 8 45
 Curry-combs, 6 barred dozen 4 01/2 1 0 75

 Reduction
 per cent in
 price of
 Description 1812 1832 1812
 s. d. s. d.

Curry-combs, 8 barred dozen 5 51/2 1 5 74
 patent, 6 barred dozen 7 11/2 1 5 80
 8 barred dozen 8 63/4 1 10 79
 Fire-irons, iron head, No. 1. 1 41/2 0 73/4 53
 No. 2 1 6 0 81/2 53
 No. 3 1 81/4 0 91/2 53
 No. 4 1 101/2 0 101/2 53
 Gun-locks, single roller each 7 21/2 1 11 73
 Locks, 1 1/4 brass, port. pad 16 0 2 6 85
 2 1/2 inch 3 keyed till-locks each 2 2 0 9 65
 Shoe tacks gross 5 0 2 0 60
 Spoons, tinned, iron table gross 22 6 7 0 69
 Stirrups. com. tinned, 2 bar dozen 7 0 2 9 61
 Trace-chains, iron cwt 46 91/2 15 0 68

 Prices of the principal materials, used in mines in Cornwall, at
different periods [I am indebited to Mr John Taylor for this
interesting table]

 ALL DELIVERED AT THE MINES

 Description 1800 1810 1820 1830 1832
 s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d. s. d.
 Coals wey 81 7 85 5 53 4 51 0 40 0
 Timber (balk) foot 2 0 4 0 1 5 1 0 0 10
 (oak) foot 3 31/2 3 0 3 6 3 3
 Ropes cwt 66 0 84 0 48 6 40 0 40 0
 Iron (common bar) cwt 20 6 14 6 11 0 7 0 6 6
 Common castings cwt 16 0 15 0 8 0 6 6
 Pumps cwt 16s. & 17s. 17s. & 18s. 12s. & 15s. 6 6 6 10
 Gunpowder 100 lbs. 114 2 117 6 68 0 52 6 49 0
 Candles 9 3 10 0 8 9 5 11 4 10
 Tallow cwt 72 0 84 0 65 8 52 6 43 0
 Leather lb. 2 4 2 3 24 22 21
 Blistered steel cwt 50 0 44 0 38 0
 2s. nails cwt 32 0 28 6 22 0 17 0 16 6


203. I cannot omit availing myself of this opportunity of
calling the attention of the manufacturers, merchants, and
factors, in all our manufacturing and commercial towns, to the
great importance, both for their own interests, and for that of
the population to which their capital gives employment, of
collecting with care such averages from the actual sales
registered in their books. Nor, perhaps, would it be without its
use to suggest, that such averages would be still more valuable
if collected from as many different quarters as possible; that
the quantity of the goods from which they are deduced, together
with the greatest deviations from the mean, ought to be given;
and that if a small committee were to undertake the task, it
would give great additional weight to the information. Political
economists have been reproached with too small a use of facts,
and too large an employment of theory. If facts are wanting, let
it be remembered that the closet-philosopher is unfortunately too
little acquainted with the admirable arrangements of the factory,
and that no class of persons can supply so readily, and with so
little sacrifice of time, the data on which all the reasonings of
political economists are founded, as the merchant and
manufacturer; and, unquestionably, to no class are the deductions
to which they give rise so important. Nor let it be feared that
erroneous deductions may be made from such recorded facts: the
errors which arise from the absence of facts are far more
numerous and more durable than those which result from unsound
reasoning respecting true data.

204. The great diminution in price of the articles here
enumerated may have arisen from several causes: 1. The alteration
in the value of the currency. 2. The increased value of gold in
consequence of the increased demand for coin. The first of these
causes may have had some influence, and the second may have had a
very small effect upon the two first quotations of prices, but
none at all upon the two latter ones. 3. The diminished rate of
profit produced by capital however employed. This may be
estimated by the average price of three per cents at the periods
stated. 4. The diminished price of the raw materials out of which
these articles were manufactured. The raw material is principally
brass and iron, and the reduction upon it may, in some measure,
be estimated by the diminished price of iron and brass wire, in
the cost of which articles, the labour bears a less proportion
than it does in many of the others. 5. The smaller quantity of
raw material employed, and perhaps, in some instances, an
inferior, quality of workmanship. 6. The improved means by which
the same effect was produced by diminished labour.

205. In order to afford the means of estimating the influence
of these several causes, the following table is subjoined:

 1812 1818 1824 1828 1830 1832
 Average Price of L s d. L s. d. L s d L s. d L s d L s. d
 Gold. per oz 4 15 6 4 0 3 17 61/2 3 17 7 3 17 91/2 3 17 10 1/2
 Value of currency. per cent 79 5 3 97 6 10 100 100 100 100
 Price of 3 per cent consols 591/4 781/4 935/8 86 893/4 821/2
 Wheat per quarter 6 5 0 4 1 0 3 2 l 3 1 1 10 3 14 6 2 19 3

 English pig iron at Birmingham 7 l0 0 6 7 6 6 l0 0 5 10 0 4 l0 0

 English bar iron at Birmingham 10 10 0 9 10 0 7 15 0 6 0 0 5 0 0
 Swedish bar iron in London, excluding duty of from L4 to L6 10s
per ton 16 10 0 17 10 0 14 0 0 14 10 0 13 15 0 13 2 0


As this table, if unaccompanied by any explanation, might
possibly lead to erroneous conclusions, I subjoin the following
observations, for which I am indebted to the kindness of Mr
Tooke, who may yet, I hope, be induced to continue his valuable
work on High and Low Prices, through the important period which
has elapsed since its publication.

'The table commences with 1812, and exhibits a great falling
off in the price of wheat and iron coincidently with a fall in
the price of gold, and leading to the inference of cause and
effect. Now, as regards wheat, it so happened that in 1812 it
reached its highest price in consequence of a series of bad
harvests, when relief by importation was difficult and enormously
expensive. In December, 1813, whilst the price of gold had risen
to L5, the price of wheat had fallen to 73s., or 50 per cent
under what it had been in the spring of 1812; proving clearly
that the two articles were under the influence of opposite
causes.

'Again, in 1812, the freight and insurance on Swedish iron
were so much higher than at present as to account for nearly the
whole of the difference of price: and in 1818 there had been an
extensive speculation which had raised the price of all iron, so
that a part of the subsequent decline was a mere reaction from a
previously unfounded elevation. More recently, in 1825, there was
a great speculative rise in the article, which served as a strong
stimulus to increased production: this, aided by improved power
of machinery, has proceeded to such an extent as fully to account
for the fall of price.'

To these reflections I will only add, that the result of my
own observation leads me to believe that by far the most
influential of these causes has been the invention of cheaper
modes of manufacturing. The extent to which this can be carried,
while a profit can yet be realized at the reduced price, is truly
astonishing, as the following fact, which rests on good
authority, will prove. Twenty years since, a brass knob for the
locks of doors was made at Birmingham; the price, at that time,
being 13s. 4d. per dozen. The same article is now manufactured,
having the same weight of metal, and an equal, or in fact a
slightly superior finish, at 1s. 9 1/4d. per dozen. One
circumstance which has produced this economy in the manufacture
is, that the lathe on which these knobs are finished is now
turned by a steam-engine; so that the workman, relieved from that
labour, can make them twenty times as fast as he did formerly.

206. The difference of price of the same article, when of
various dimensions at different periods in the same country--and
in different countries--is curiously contrasted in the annexed
table.

 Comparative price of plate glass, at the manufactories of
London, Paris, Berlin, and Petersburg

 DIMENSIONS LONDON PARIS BERLIN PETERSBURG
 Height Breadth 1771 1794 1832 1825 1835 1828 1825
 in inches in inches L s d L s d L s d L s d L s d L s d L s d
 16 16 0103 0101 0176 087 076 081 0410
 30 20 146 232 2610 11610 1710 0106 1210
 50 30 24 2 4 11 5 0 6 12 10 9 0 5 5 0 3 8 13 0 5 15 0
 60 40 67 14 10 27 0 0 13 9 6 22 7 5 10 4 3 21 18 0 12 9 0
 76 40 43 6 0 19 2 9 36 4 5 14 17 5 35 2 11 17 5 0
 90 50 84 8 0 34 12 9 71 3 8 28 13 4 33 18 7
 100 75 275 0 0 74 5 10 210 13 3 70 9 7
 120 75 97 15 9 354 3 2 98 3 10


The price of silvering these plates is twenty per cent on the
cost price for English glass; ten per cent on the cost price for
Paris plates; and twelve and a half on those of Berlin.

The following table shews the dimensions and price, when
silvered, of the largest plates of glass ever made by the British
Plate Glass Company, which are now at their warehouse in London:

Height Breadth Price when silvered
 Inches Inches L s. d.

 132 84 200 8 0
 146 81 220 7 0
 149 84 239 1 6
 131 83 239 10 7
 160 80 246 15 4


The prices of the largest glass in the Paris lists when
silvered, and reduced to English measure, were:

Year Inches Inches Price when silvered
                        L  s. d.
 1825 128 80           629 12 0
 1835 128 80           136 19 0


207. If we wish to compare the value of any article at
different periods of time, it is clear that neither any one
substance, nor even the combination of all manufactured goods,
can furnish us with an invariable unit by which to form our scale
of estimation. Mr Malthus has proposed for this purpose to
consider a day's labour of an agricultural labourer, as the unit
to which all value should be referred. Thus, if we wish to
compare the value of twenty yards of broad cloth in Saxony at the
present time, with that of the same kind and quantity of cloth
fabricated in England two centuries ago, we must find the number
of days' labour the cloth would have purchased in England at the
time mentioned, and compare it with the number of days' labour
which the same quantity of cloth will now purchase in Saxony.
Agricultural labour appears to have been selected, because it
exists in all countries, and employs a large number of persons,
and also because it requires a very small degree of previous
instruction. It seems, in fact, to be merely the exertion of a
man's physical force; and its value above that of a machine of
equal power arises from its portability, and from the facility of
directing its efforts to arbitrary and continually fluctuating
purposes. It may perhaps be worthy of enquiry, whether a more
constant average might not be deduced from combining with this
species of labour those trades which require but a moderate
exertion of skill and which likewise exist in all civilized
countries, such as those of the blacksmith and carpenter,
etc.(1*) In all such comparisons there is, however, another
element, which, though not essentially necessary, will yet add
much to our means of judging.

It is an estimate of the quantity of that food on which the
labourer usually subsists, which is necessary for his daily
support, compared with the quantity which his daily wages will
purchase.

208. The existence of a class of middlemen, between small
producers and merchants, is frequently advantageous to both
parties; and there are certain periods in the history of several
manufactures which naturally call that class of traders into
existence. There are also times when the advantage ceasing, the
custom of employing them also terminates; the middlemen,
especially when numerous, as they sometimes are in retail trades,
enhancing the price without equivalent good. Thus, in the recent
examination by the House of Commons into the state of the coal
trade, it appears that five-sixths of the London public is
supplied by a class of middlemen who are called in the trade
Brass plate coal merchants: these consist principally of
merchants' clerks, gentlemen's servants, and others, who have no
wharfs of their own, but merely give their orders to some true
coal merchant, who sends in the coals from his wharf: the brass
plate coal merchants, of course, receiving a commission for his
agency.

209. In Italy this system is carried to a great extent
amongst the voituriers, or persons who undertake to convey
travellers. There are some possessed of greater fluency and a
more persuasive manner who frequent the inns where the English
resort, and who, as soon as they have made a bargain for the
conveyance of a traveller, go out amongst their countrymen and
procure some other voiturier to do the job for a considerably
smaller sum, themselves pocketing the difference. A short time
before the day of starting, the contractor appears before his
customer in great distress, regretting his inability to perform
the journey on account of the dangerous illness of a mother or
some relative, and requesting to have his cousin or brother
substituted for him. The English traveller rarely fails to
acquiesce in this change, and often praises the filial piety of
the rogue who has deceived him.

NOTES:

1. Much information for such an enquiry is to be found, for the
particular period to which it refers, in the Report of the
Committee of the House of Commons on Manufacturers' Employment, 2
July, 1830.



Chapter 18

Of Raw Materials

210. Although the cost of any article may be reduced in its
ultimate analysis to the quantity of labour by which it was
produced; yet it is usual, in a certain state of the manufacture
of most substances, to call them by the term raw material. Thus
iron, when reduced from the ore and rendered malleable, is in a
state fitted for application to a multitude of useful purposes,
and is the raw material out of which most of our tools are made.
In this stage of its manufacture, but a moderate quantity of
labour has been expended on the substance; and it becomes an
interesting subject to trace the various proportions in which raw
material, in this sense of the term, and labour unite to
constitute the value of many of the productions of the arts.

211. Gold leaf consists of a portion of the metal beaten out
to so great a degree of thinness, as to allow a greenish-blue
light to be transmitted through its pores. About 400 square
inches of this are sold, in the form of a small book containing
25 leaves of gold, for 1s. 6d. In this case, the raw material, or
gold, is worth rather less than two-thirds of the manufactured
article. In the case of silver leaf, the labour considerably
exceeds the value of the material. A book of fifty leaves, which
would cover above 1000 square inches, is sold for 1s. 3d.

212. We may trace the relative influence of the two causes
above referred to, in the prices of fine gold chains made at
Venice. The sizes of these chains are known by numbers, the
smallest having been (in 1828) No. 1, and the numbers 2, 3, 4,
etc., progressively increasing in size. The following table shews
the numbers and the prices of those made at that time.(1*) The
first column gives the number by which the chain is known; the
second expresses the weight in grains of one inch in length of
each chain; the third column the number of links in the same
length; and the last expresses the price, in francs worth
tenpence each, of a Venetian braccio, or about two English feet
of each chain.

 Venetian gold chains
 Price of a Venetian
 Braccio, equal to
 Weight of Number of links two feet 1/8 inch
 No. one inch, in grains in one inch English
 0.44 98 to 100 60 francs
 1.56 92 40
 1 1/2.77 88 26
 2.99 84 20
 3 1.46 72 20
 4 1.61 64 21
 5 2.09 64 23
 6 2.61 60 24
 7 3.36 56 27
 8 3.65 56 29
 9 3.72 56 32
 10 5.35 50 34
 24 9.71 32 60


Amongst these chains, that numbered 0 and that numbered 24
are exactly of the same price, although the quantity of gold in
the latter is twenty-two times as much as in the former. The
difficulty of making the smallest chain is so great, that the
women who make it cannot work above two hours at a time. As we
advance from the smaller chain, the proportionate value of the
work to the worth of the material becomes less and less, until at
the numbers 2 and 3, these two elements of cost balance each
other: after which, the difficulty of the work decreases, and the
value of the material increases.

213. The quantity of labour expended on these chains is,
however, incomparably less than that which is applied in some of
the manufactures of iron. In the case of the smallest Venetian
chain the value of the labour is not above thirty times that of
the gold. The pendulum spring of a watch, which governs the
vibrations of the balance, costs at the retail price two pence,
and weighs fifteen one-hundredths of a grain, whilst the retail
price of a pound of the best iron, the raw material out of which
fifty thousand such springs are made, is exactly the same sum of
two pence.

214. The comparative price of labour and of raw material
entering into the manufactures of France, has been ascertained
with so much care, in a memoir of M. A. M. Heron de Villefosse,
Recherches statistiques, sur les Metaux de France.(2*) that we
shall give an abstract of his results reduced to English
measures. The facts respecting the metals relate to the year
1825.

In France the quantity of raw material which can be purchased
for L1, when manufactured into

 Silk goods is worth L2.37
 Broad cloth and woollens 2.15
 Hemp and cables 3.94
 Linen comprising thread laces 5.00
 Cotton goods 2.44

 The price of pig-lead was L1 1s. per cwt; and lead of the value
of L1 sterling, became worth, when manufactured into

 Sheets or pipes of moderate dimensions L 1. 25
 White lead 2.60
 Ordinary printing characters 4.90
 The smallest type 28.30

 The price of copper was L5 2s. per cwt. Copper worth L1 became
when manufactured into

 Copper sheeting L1.26
 Household utensils 4.77
 Common brass pins tinned 2.34
 Rolled into plates covered with 1/20 silver 3.56
 Woven into metallic cloth, each square inch of which contains
10,000 meshes 52.23


The price of tin was L4 12s. per cwt. Tin worth L1 when
manufactured into

 Leaves for silvering glass became L1.73
 Household utensils 1.85


Quicksilver cost L10 16s. per cwt. Quicksilver worth L1 when
manufactured into

 Vermilion of average quality became L1.81


Metallic arsenic cost L1 4s. per cwt. Arsenic worth L1 when
manufactured into

 White oxide of arsenic became L1.83
 Sulphuret (orpiment) 4.26


The price of cast-iron was 8s. per cwt. Cast-iron worth L1
when manufactured into

 Household utensils became L2.00
 Machinery 4.00
 Ornamental. as buckles. etc 45.00
 Bracelets. figures, buttons. etc. 147.00


Bar-iron cost L1 6s. per cwt. Bar-iron worth L1 when
manufactured into

 Agricultural instruments became L3.57
 Barrels, musket 9. 10
 Barrels of double-barrel guns. twisted and damasked 238.08
 Blades of penknives 657.14
 razor. cast steel 53.57 sabre, for cavalry. infantry, and
artillery. etc. from 9.25 to 16.07
 of table knives 35.70
 Buckles of polished steel, used as jewellery 896.66
 Clothiers' pins 8.03
 Door-latches and bolts from 4.85 to 8.50
 Files, common 2.55 flat, cast steel 20.44
 Horseshoes 2.55
 Iron, small slit, for nails 1. 10
 Metallic cloth, iron wire, No. 80 96.71
 Needles of various sizes from 17.33 to 70.85
 Reeds for weaving 3-4ths calico 21.87
 Saws (frame) of steel 5. 12
 for wood 14.28
Scissors, finest kind 446.94
 Steel, cast 4.28
 cast, in sheets 6.25
 cemented 2.41
 natural 1.42
 Sword handles, polished steel 972.82
 Tinned iron from 2.04 to 2.34
 Wire, iron from 2. 14 to 10.71


215. The following is stated by M. de Villefosse to be the
price of bar-iron at the forges of various countries, in January,
1825.

per ton
 L s. d.
 France 26 10 0
 Belgium and Germany 16 14 0
 Sweden and Russia, at Stockholm and St Petersburg 13 13 0
 England, at Cardiff 10 1 0

 The price of the article in 1832 was 5 0 0


M. De Villefosse states, that in France bar-iron, made as it
usually is with charcoal, costs three times the price of the
cast-iron out of which it is made; whilst in England, where it is
usually made with coke, the cost is only twice the price of
cast-iron.

216. The present price (1832) of lead in England is L13 per
ton, and the worth of L1 of it manufactured into

 Milled sheet lead becomes Ll.08


The present price of cake copper is L84 per ton, and the
worth of L1 of it manufactured into

 Sheet copper becomes L1.11

NOTES:

1. A still finer chain is now manufactured (1832).

2.  Memoires de l'Institut. 1826



Chapter 19

On the Division of Labour

217. Perhaps the most important principle on which the
economy of a manufacture depends, is the division of labour
amongst the persons who perform the work. The first application
of this principle must have been made in a very early stage of
society, for it must soon have been apparent, that a larger
number of comforts and conveniences could be acquired by each
individual, if one man restricted his occupation to the art of
making bows, another to that of building houses, a third boats,
and so on. This division of labour into trades was not, however,
the result of an opinion that the general riches of the community
would be increased by such an arrangement; but it must have
arisen from the circumstance of each individual so employed
discovering that he himself could thus make a greater profit of
his labour than by pursuing more varied occupations. Society must
have made considerable advances before this principle could have
been carried into the workshop; for it is only in countries which
have attained a high degree of civilization, and in articles in
which there is a great competition amongst the producers, that
the most perfect system of the division of labour is to be
observed. The various principles on which the advantages of this
system depend, have been much the subject of discussion amongst
writers on political economy; but the relative importance of
their influence does not appear, in all cases, to have been
estimated with sufficient precision. It is my intention, in the
first instance, to state shortly those principles, and then to
point out what appears to me to have been omitted by those who
have previously treated the subject.

218. 1. Of the time required for learning. It will readily be
admitted, that the portion of time occupied in the acquisition of
any art will depend on the difficulty of its execution; and that
the greater the number of distinct processes, the longer will be
the time which the apprentice must employ in acquiring it. Five
or seven years have been adopted, in a great many trades, as the
time considered requisite for a lad to acquire a sufficient
knowledge of his art, and to enable him to repay by his labour,
during the latter portion of his time, the expense incurred by
his master at its commencement. If, however, instead of learning
all the different processes for making a needle, for instance,
his attention be confined to one operation, the portion of time
consumed unprofitably at the commencement of his apprenticeship
will be small, and all the rest of it will be beneficial to his
master: and, consequently, if there be any competition amongst
the masters, the apprentice will be able to make better terms,
and diminish the period of his servitude. Again, the facility of
acquiring skill in a single process, and the early period of life
at which it can be made a source of profit, will induce a greater
number of parents to bring up their children to it; and from this
circumstance also, the number of workmen being increased, the
wages will soon fall.

219. 2. Of waste of materials in learning. A certain quantity
of material will, in all cases, be consumed unprofitably, or
spoiled by every person who learns an art; and as he applies
himself to each new process, he will waste some of the raw
material, or of the partly manufactured commodity. But if each
man commit this waste in acquiring successively every process,
the quantity of waste will be much greater than if each person
confine his attention to one process; in this view of the
subject, therefore, the division of labour will diminish the
price of production.

220. 3. Another advantage resulting from the division of
labour is, the saving of that portion of time which is always
lost in changing from one occupation to another. When the human
hand, or the human head, has been for some time occupied in any
kind of work, it cannot instantly change its employment with full
effect. The muscles of the limbs employed have acquired a
flexibility during their exertion, and those not in action a
stiffness during rest, which renders every change slow and
unequal in the commencement. Long habit also produces in the
muscles exercised a capacity for enduring fatigue to a much
greater degree than they could support under other circumstances.
A similar result seems to take place in any change of mental
exertion; the attention bestowed on the new subject not being so
perfect at first as it becomes after some exercise.

221. 4. Change of tools. The employment of different tools in
the successive processes is another cause of the loss of time in
changing from one operation to another. If these tools are
simple, and the change is not frequent, the loss of time is not
considerable; but in many processes of the arts the tools are of
great delicacy, requiring accurate adjustment every time they are
used; and in many cases the time employed in adjusting bears a
large proportion to that employed in using the tool. The
sliding-rest, the dividing and the drilling-engine, are of this
kind; and hence, in manufactories of sufficient extent, it is
found to be good economy to keep one machine constantly employed
in one kind of work: one lathe, for example, having a screw
motion to its sliding-rest along the whole length of its bed, is
kept constantly making cylinders; another, having a motion for
equalizing the velocity of the work at the point at which it
passes the tool, is kept for facing surfaces; whilst a third is
constantly employed in cutting wheels.

222. 5. Skill acquired by frequent repetition of the same
processes. The constant repetition of the same process
necessarily produces in the workman a degree of excellence and
rapidity in his particular department, which is never possessed
by a person who is obliged to execute many different processes.
This rapidity is still further increased from the circumstance
that most of the operations in factories, where the division of
labour is carried to a considerable extent, are paid for as
piece-work. It is difficult to estimate in numbers the effect of
this cause upon production. In nail-making, Adam Smith has
stated, that it is almost three to one; for, he observes, that a
smith accustomed to make nails, but whose whole business has not
been that of a nailer, can make only from eight hundred to a
thousand per day; whilst a lad who had never exercised any other
trade, can make upwards of two thousand three hundred a day.

223. In different trades, the economy of production arising
from the last-mentioned cause will necessarily be different. The
case of nail-making is, perhaps, rather an extreme one. It must,
however, be observed, that, in one sense, this is not a permanent
source of advantage; for, though it acts at the commencement of
an establishment, yet every month adds to the skill of the
workmen; and at the end of three or four years they will not be
very far behind those who have never practised any other branch
of their art. Upon an occasion when a large issue of bank-notes
was required, a clerk at the Bank of England signed his name,
consisting of seven letters, including the initial of his
Christian name, five thousand three hundred times during eleven
working hours, besides arranging the notes he had signed in
parcels of fifty each.

224. 6. The division of labour suggests the contrivance of
tools and machinery to execute its processes. When each
processes, by which any article is produced, is the sole
occupation of one individual, his whole attention being devoted
to a very limited and simple operation, improvements in the form
of his tools, or in the mode of using them, are much more likely
to occur to his mind, than if it were distracted by a greater
variety of circumstances. Such an improvement in the tool is
generally the first step towards a machine. If a piece of metal
is to be cut in a lathe, for example, there is one particular
angle at which the cutting-tool must be held to insure the
cleanest cut; and it is quite natural that the idea of fixing the
tool at that angle should present itself to an intelligent
workman. The necessity of moving the tool slowly, and in a
direction parallel to itself, would suggest the use of a screw,
and thus arises the sliding-rest. It was probably the idea of
mounting a chisel in a frame, to prevent its cutting too deeply,
which gave rise to the common carpenter's plane. In cases where a
blow from a hammer is employed, experience teaches the proper
force required. The transition from the hammer held in the hand
to one mounted upon an axis, and lifted regularly to a certain
height by some mechanical contrivance, requires perhaps a greater
degree of invention than those just instanced; yet it is not
difficult to perceive, that, if the hammer always falls from the
same height, its effect must be always the same.

225. When each process has been reduced to the use of some
simple tool, the union of all these tools, actuated by one moving
power, constitutes a machine. In contriving tools and simplifying
processes, the operative workmen are, perhaps, most successful;
but it requires far other habits to combine into one machine
these scattered arts. A previous education as a workman in the
peculiar trade, is undoubtedly a valuable preliminary; but in
order to make such combinations with any reasonable expectation
of success, an extensive knowledge of machinery, and the power of
making mechanical drawings, are essentially requisite. These
accomplishments are now much more common than they were
formerly, and their absence was, perhaps, one of the causes of
the multitude of failures in the early history of many of our
manufactures.

226. Such are the principles usually assigned as the causes
of the advantage resulting from the division of labour. As in the
view I have taken of the question, the most important and
influential cause has been altogether unnoticed, I shall restate
those principles in the words of Adam Smith:

"The great increase in the quantity of work, which, in consequence
of the division of labour, the same number of people are capable
of performing, is owing to three different circumstances: first,
to the increase of dexterity in every particular workman;
secondly, to the saving of time, which is commonly lost in
passing from one species of work to another; and, lastly, to the
invention of a great number of machines which facilitate and
abridge labour, and enable one man to do the work of many."

Now, although all these are important causes, and each has
its influence on the result; yet it appears to me, that any
explanation of the cheapness of manufactured articles, as
consequent upon the division of labour, would be incomplete if
the following principle were omitted to be stated.

That the master manufacturer, by dividing the work to be
executed into different processes, each requiring different
degrees of skill or of force, can purchase exactly that precise
quantity of both which is necessary for each process; whereas, if
the whole work were executed by one workman, that person must
possess sufficient skill to perform the most difficult, and
sufficient strength to execute the most laborious, of the
operations into which the art is divided.(1*)

227. As the clear apprehension of this principle, upon which
a great part of the economy arising from the division of labour
depends, is of considerable importance, it may be desirable to
point out its precise and numerical application in some specific
manufacture. The art of making needles is, perhaps, that which I
should have selected for this illustration, as comprehending a
very large number of processes remarkably different in their
nature; but the less difficult art of pinmaking, has some claim
to attention, from its having been used by Adam Smith; and I am
confirmed in the choice of it, by the circumstance of our
possessing a very accurate and minute description of that art, as
practised in France above half a century ago.

228. Pin-making. In the manufacture of pins in England the
following processes are employed:

1. Wire-drawing. (a) The brass wire used for making pins is
purchased by the manufacturer in coils of about twenty-two inches
in diameter, each weighing about thirty-six pounds. (b) The coils
are wound off into smaller ones of about six inches in diameter,
and between one and two pounds' weight. (c) The diameter of this
wire is now reduced, by drawing it repeatedly through holes in
steel plates, until it becomes of the size required for the sort
of pins intended to be made. During this process the wire is
hardened, and to prevent its breaking, it must be annealed two or
three times, according to the diminution of diameter required.
(d) The coils are then soaked in sulphuric acid, largely diluted
with water, in order to clean them, and are then beaten on stone,
for the purpose of removing any oxidated coating which may adhere
to them. These operations are usually performed by men, who draw
and clean from thirty to thirty-six pounds of wire a day. They
are paid at the rate of five farthings per pound, and generally
earn about 3s. 6d. per day.

M. Perronnet made some experiments on the extension the wire
undergoes in passing through each hole: he took a piece of thick
Swedish brass wire, and found

 Feet Inches
 Its length to be before drawing 3 8
 After passing the first hole 5 5
 second hole 7 2
 third hole 7 8

 It was now annealed, and the length became

 After passing the fourth hole 10 8
 fifth hole 13 1
 sixth hole 16 8
 And finally, after passing through six other holes 144 0


The holes through which the wire was drawn were not, in this
experiment, of regularly decreasing diameter: it is extremely
difficult to make such holes, and still more to preserve them in
their original dimensions.

229. 2. Straightening the wire. The coil of wire now passes
into the hands of a woman, assisted by a boy or girl. A few
nails, or iron pins, not quite in a line, are fixed into one end
of a wooden table about twenty feet in length; the end of the
wire is passed alternately between these nails, and is then
pulled to the other end of the table. The object of this process
is to straighten the wire, which had acquired a considerable
curvature in the small coils in which it had been wound. The
length thus straightened is cut off, and the remainder of the
coil is drawn into similar lengths. About seven nails or pins are
employed in straightening the wire, and their adjustment is a
matter of some nicety. It seems, that by passing the wire between
the first three nails or pins, a bend is produced in an opposite
direction to that which the wire had in the coil; this bend, by
passing the next two nails, is reduced to another less curved in
the first direction, and so on till the curve of the wire may at
last be confounded with a straight line.

230. 3. Pointing. (a) A man next takes about three hundred of
these straightened pieces in a parcel, and putting them into a
gauge, cuts off from one end, by means of a pair of shears, moved
by his foot, a portion equal in length to rather more than six
pins. He continues this operation until the entire parcel is
reduced into similar pieces. (b) The next step is to sharpen the
ends: for this purpose the operator sits before a steel mill,
which is kept rapidly revolving: it consists of a cylinder about
six inches in diameter, and two and a half inches broad, faced
with steel, which is cut in the manner of a file. Another
cylinder is fixed on the same axis at a few inches distant; the
file on the edge of which is of a finer kind, and is used for
finishing off the points. The workman now takes up a parcel of
the wires between the finger and thumb of each hand, and presses
the ends obliquely on the mill, taking care with his fingers and
thumbs to make each wire slowly revolve upon its axis. Having
thus pointed all the pieces at one end, he reverses them, and
performs the same operation on the other. This process requires
considerable skill, but it is not unhealthy; whilst the similar
process in needlemaking is remarkably destructive of health. (c)
The pieces now pointed at both ends, are next placed in gauges,
and the pointed ends are cut off, by means of shears, to the
proper length of which the pins are to be made. The remaining
portions of the wire are now equal to about four pins in length,
and are again pointed at each end, and their lengths again cut
off. This process is repeated a third time, and the small portion
of wire left in the middle is thrown amongst the waste, to be
melted along with the dust arising from the sharpening. It is
usual for a man, his wife, and a child, to join in performing
these processes; and they are paid at the rate of five farthings
per pound. They can point from thirty-four to thirty-six and a
half pounds per day, and gain from 6s. 6d. to 7s., which may be
apportioned thus; 5s. 6d. the man. 1s. the woman, 6d. to the boy
or girl.

231. 4. Twisting and cutting the heads. The next process is
making the heads. For this purpose (a) a boy takes a piece of
wire, of the same diameter as the pin to be headed, which he
fixes on an axis that can be made to revolve rapidly by means of
a wheel and strap connected with it. This wire is called the
mould. He then takes a smaller wire, which having passed through
an eye in a small tool held in his left hand, he fixes close to
the bottom of the mould. The mould is now made to revolve rapidly
by means of the right hand, and the smaller wire coils round it
until it has covered the whole length of the mould. The boy now
cuts the end of the spiral connected with the foot of the mould,
and draws it off. (b) When a sufficient quantity of heading is
thus made, a man takes from thirteen to twenty of these spirals
in his left hand, between his thumb and three outer fingers:
these he places in such a manner that two turns of the spiral
shall be beyond the upper edge of a pair of shears, and with the
forefinger of the same hand he feels that only two turns do so
project. With his right hand he closes the shears; and the two
turns of the spiral being cut off, drop into a basin; the
position of the forefinger preventing the heads from flying about
when cut off. The workmen who cut the heads are usually paid at
the rate of 2 1/2d. to 3d. per pound for large heads, but a
higher price is given for the smaller heading. Out of this they
pay the boy who spins the spiral; he receives from 4d. to 6d. a
day. A good workman can cut from six to about thirty pounds of
heading per day, according to its size.

232. 5. Heading. The process of fixing the head on the body
of the pin is usually executed by women and children. Each
operator sits before a small steel stake, having a cavity, into
which one half of the intended head will fit; immediately above
is a steel die, having a corresponding cavity for the other half
of the head: this latter die can be raised by a pedal moved by
the foot. The weight of the hammer is from seven to ten pounds,
and it falls through a very small space, perhaps from one to two
inches. The cavities in the centre of these dies are connected
with the edge of a small groove, to admit of the body of the pin,
which is thus prevented from being flattened by the blow of the
die. (a) The operator with his left hand dips the pointed end of
the body of a pin into a tray of heads; having passed the point
through one of them, he carries it along to the other end with
the forefinger. He now takes the pin in the right hand, and
places the head in the cavity of the stake, and, lifting the die
with his foot, allows it to fall on the head. This blow tightens
the head on the shank, which is then turned round, and the head
receives three or four blows on different parts of its
circumference. The women and children who fix the heads are paid
at the rate of 1s. 6d. for every twenty thousand. A skilful
operator can with great exertion do twenty thousand per day, but
from ten to fifteen thousand is the usual quantity: children head
a much smaller number: varying, of course, with the degree of
their skill. About one per cent of the pins are spoiled in the
process; these are picked out afterwards by women, and are
reserved, along with the waste from other processes, for the
melting-pot. The die in which the heads are struck is varied in
form according to the fashion of the time; but the repeated blows
to which it is subject render it necessary that it should be
repaired after it has been used for about thirty pounds of pins.

233. 6. Tinning. The pins are now fit to be tinned, a process
which is usually executed by a man, assisted by his wife, or by a
lad. The quantity of pins operated upon at this stage is usually
fifty-six pounds. (a) They are first placed in a pickle, in order
to remove any grease or dirt from their surface, and also to
render them rough, which facilitates the adherence of the tin
with which they are to be covered. (b) They are then placed in a
boiler full of a solution of tartar in water, in which they are
mixed with a quantity of tin in small grains. In this they are
generally kept boiling for about two hours and a half, and are
then removed into a tub of water into which some bran has been
thrown, for the purpose of washing off the acid liquor. (c) They
are then taken out, and, being placed in wooden trays, are well
shaken in dry bran: this removes any water adhering to them; and
by giving the wooden tray a peculiar kind of motion, the pins are
thrown up, and the bran gradually flies off, and leaves them
behind in the tray. The man who pickles and tins the pins usually
gets one penny per pound for the work, and employs himself,
during the boiling of one batch of pins, in drying those
previously tinned. He can earn about 9s. per day; but out of this
he pays about 3s. for his assistant.

234. 7. Papering. The pins come from the tinner in wooden
bowls, with the points projecting in all directions: the
arranging of them side by side in paper is generally performed by
women. (a) A woman takes up some, and places them on a comb, and
shaking them, some of the pins fall back into the bowl, and the
rest, being caught by their heads, are detained between the teeth
of the comb. (b) Having thus arranged them in a parallel
direction, she fixes the requisite number between two pieces of
iron, having twenty-five small grooves, at equal distances; (c)
and having previously doubled the paper, she presses it against
the points of the pins until they have passed through the two
folds which are to retain them. The pins are then relieved from
the grasp of the tool, and the process is repeated. A woman gains
about 1s. 6d. per day by papering; but children are sometimes
employed, who earn from 6d. per day, and upwards.

235. Having thus generally described the various processes of
pin-making, and having stated the usual cost of each, it will be
convenient to present a tabular view of the time occupied by each
process, and its cost, as well as the sums which can be earned by
the persons who confine themselves solely to each process. As the
rate of wages is itself fluctuating, and as the prices paid and
quantities executed have been given only between certain limits,
it is not to be expected that this table can represent the cost
of each part of the work with the minutest accuracy, nor even
that it shall accord perfectly with the prices above given: but
it has been drawn up with some care, and will be quite sufficient
to serve as the basis of those reasonings which it is meant to
illustrate. A table nearly similar will be subjoined, which has
been deduced from a statement of M. Perronet, respecting the art
of pin-making in France, above seventy years ago.

English manufacture

236. Pins, Elevens, 5546 weigh one pound; one dozen = 6932
pins weigh twenty ounces, and require six ounces of paper.

 Name of the process
 Workman
 Time for making 1 lb of pins Hours
 Cost of making 1 lb of pins Pence
 Workmen earns per day s. d.
 Price of making each part of a single pin in millionths of a
penny


 1. Drawing wire (224)         Man    .3636  1.2500   3 3     225
 2. Straightening wire ( 225)  Woman  .3000   .2840   1 0      51
                               Girl   .3000   .1420   0 6      26
 3. Pointing (226)             Man    .3000  1.7750   5 3     319
 4. Twisting and cutting heads Boy    .0400   .0147   0 4 1/2   3
   (227)                       Man    .0400   .2103   5 4 1/2  38
 5. Heading (228)              Woman 4.0000  5.0000   1 3     901
 6 Tinning or whitening        Man    .1071   .6666   6 0     121
   (229)                       Woman  .1071   .3333   3 0      60
 7. Papering (230)             Woman 2.1314  3.1973   1 6     576
                                     7.6892 12.8732   - -    2320

Number of persons employed: Men. 4; Women. 4; Children, 2.
Total, 10.

French manufacture

237. Cost of 12,000 pins, No. 6, each being eight-tenths of an
English inch in length,--as they were manufactured in France about
1760; with the cost of each operation: deduced from the
observations and statement of M. Perronet.

 Name of the process
 Time for making twelve thousand pins Hours
 Cost of  making twelve thousand  pins Pence
 Workman usually earns per day Pence
 Expense of tools and materials Pence

 1. Wire                      --   --      --  24.75
 2. Straightening and cutting 1.2 .5     4.5      --
 3. Coarse pointing           1.2 .625  10.0      --
    Turning wheel(2*)         1.2 .875   7.0      --
    Fine Pointing              .8 .5     9.375    --
    Turning wheel             1.2 .5     4.75     --
    Cutting off pointed ends   .6 .375   7.5      --
 4. Turning spiral             .5 .125   3.0      --
    Cutting off heads          .8 .375   5.625    --
    Fuel to anneal ditto      --   --      --    .125
 5. Heading                  12.0 .333   4.25     --
 6. Tartar for cleaning       --   --      --    .5
    Tartar for whitening      --   --      --    .5
 7. Papering                  4.8 .5     2.0      --
    Paper                     --   --      --   1.0
    Wear of tools             --   --      --   2.0
                             24.3 4.708

 The great expense of turning the wheel appears to have arisen
from the person so occupied being unemployed during half his
time, whilst the pointer went to another manufactory


338. It appears from the analysis we have given of the art of
pinmaking, that it occupies rather more than seven hours and a
half of time, for ten different individuals working in succession
on the same material, to convert it into a pound of pins; and
that the total expense of their labour, each being paid in the
joint ratio of his skill and of the time he is employed, amounts
very nearly to 1s. 1d. But from an examination of the first of
these tables, it appears that the wages earned by the persons
employed vary from 4 1/2d. per day up to 6s., and consequently
the skill which is required for their respective employments may
be measured by those sums. Now it is evident, that if one person
were required to make the whole pound of pins, he must have skill
enough to earn about 5s. 3d. per day, whilst he is pointing the
wires or cutting off the heads from the spiral coils--and 6s.
when he is whitening the pins; which three operations together
would occupy little more than the seventeenth part of his time.
It is also apparent, that during more than one half of his time
he must be earning only 1s. 3d, per day, in putting on the heads;
although his skill, if properly employed, would, in the same
time, produce nearly five times as much. If, therefore, we were
to employ, for all the processes, the man who whitens the pins,
and who earns 6s. per day, even supposing that he could make the
pound of pins in an equally short time, yet we must pay him for
his time 46. 14 pence, or about 3s. 10d. The pins would therefore
cost, in making, three times and three quarters as much as they
now do by the application of the division of labour.

The higher the skill required of the workman in any one
process of a manufacture, and the smaller the time during which
it is employed, so much the greater will be the advantage of
separating that process from the rest, and devoting one person's
attention entirely to it. Had we selected the art of
needle-making as our illustration, the economy arising from the
division of labour would have been still more striking; for the
process of tempering the needles requires great skill, attention,
and experience, and although from three to four thousand are
tempered at once, the workman is paid a very high rate of wages.
In another process of the same manufacture, dry-pointing, which
also is executed with great rapidity, the wages earned by the
workman reach from 7s. to 12s., 15s., and even, in some
instances, to 20s. per day; whilst other processes are carried on
by children paid at the rate of 6d. per day.

239. Some further reflections suggested by the preceding
analysis, will be reserved until we have placed before the reader
a brief description of a machine for making pins, invented by an
American. It is highly ingenious in point of contrivance, and, in
respect to its economical principles, will furnish a strong and
interesting contrast with the manufacture of pins by the human
hand. In this machine a coil of brass wire is placed on an axis;
one end of this wire is drawn by a pair of rollers through a
small hole in a plate of steel, and is held there by a forceps.
As soon as the machine is put in action, -

1. The forceps draws the wire on to a distance equal in
length to one pin: a cutting edge of steel then descends close to
the hole through which the wire entered, and severs the piece
drawn out.

2. The forceps holding the piece thus separated moves on,
till it brings the wire to the centre of the chuck of a small
lathe, which opens to receive it. Whilst the forceps is returning
to fetch another piece of wire, the lathe revolves rapidly, and
grinds the projecting end of the wire upon a steel mill, which
advances towards it.

3. After this first or coarse pointing, the lathe stops, and
another forceps takes hold of the half-pointed pin, (which is
instantly released by the opening of the chuck), and conveys it
to a similar chuck of an adjacent lathe, which receives it, and
finishes the pointing on a finer steel mill.

4. This mill again stops, and another forceps removes the
pointed pin into a pair of strong steel clams, having a small
groove in them by which they hold the pin very firmly. A part of
this groove, which terminates at that edge of the steel clams
which is intended to form the head of the pin, is made conical. A
small round steel punch is now driven forcibly against the end of
the wire thus clamped, and the head of the pin is partially
formed by compressing the wire into the conical cavity.

NOTES:

1. I have already stated that this principle presented itself to
me after a personal examination of a number of manufactories and
workshops devoted to different purposes; but I have since found
that it had been distinctly pointed out in the work of Gioja.
Nuovo Prospetto delle Scienze Economiche. 6 tom. 4to. Milano,
1815, tom. i. capo iv.

2. The great expense of turning the wheel appears to have arisen
from the person so occupied being unemployed during half his
time, whilst the pointer went to another manufactory.



Chapter 20

On the Division of Labour

241. We have already mentioned what may, perhaps, appear
paradoxical to some of our readers that the division of labour
can be applied with equal success to mental as to mechanical
operations, and that it ensures in both the same economy of time.
A short account of its practical application, in the most
extensive series of calculations ever executed, will offer an
interesting illustration of this fact, whilst at the same time it
will afford an occasion for shewing that the arrangements which
ought to regulate the interior economy of a manufactory, are
founded on principles of deeper root than may have been supposed,
and are capable of being usefully employed in preparing the road
to some of the sublimest investigations of the human mind.

242. In the midst of that excitement which accompanied the
Revolution of France and the succeeding wars, the ambition of the
nation, unexhausted by its fatal passion for military renown, was
at the same time directed to some of the nobler and more
permanent triumphs which mark the era of a people's greatness and
which receive the applause of posterity long after their
conquests have been wrested from them, or even when their
existence as a nation may be told only by the page of history.
Amongst their enterprises of science, the French Government was
desirous of producing a series of mathematical tables, to
facilitate the application of the decimal system which they had
so recently adopted. They directed, therefore, their
mathematicians to construct such tables, on the most extensive
scale. Their most distinguished philosophers, responding fully to
the call of their country, invented new methods for this
laborious task; and a work, completely answering the large
demands of the Government, was produced in a remarkably short
period of time. M. Prony, to whom the superintendence of this
great undertaking was confided, in speaking of its commencement,
observes: Je m'y livrai avec toute l'ardeur dont j'etois capable,
et je m'occupai d'abord du plan general de l'execution. Toutes
les conditions que j'avois a remplir necessitoient l'emploi d'un
grand nombre de calculateurs; et il me vint bientot a la pensee
d'appliquer a la connection de ces Tables la division du travail,
dont les Arts de Commerce tirent un parti si avantageux pour
reunir a la pernection de main-d'oeuvre l'economie de la depense
et du temps. The circumstance which gave rise to this singular
application of the principle of the division on labour is so
interesting, that no apology is necessary for introducing it from
a small pamphlet printed at Paris a few years since, when a
proposition was made by the English to the French Government,
that the two countries should print these tables at their joint
expense.

243. The origin of the idea is related in the following
extract:

C'est a un chapitre d'un ouvrage Anglais,(1*) justement
celebre, (I.) qu'est probablement due l'existence de l'ouvrage
dont le gouvernement Britannique veut faire jouir le monde
savant:

Voici l'anecdote: M. de Prony s'etait engage. avec les
comites de gouvernement. a composer pour la division centesimale
du cercle, des tables logarithmiques et trigonometriques, qui,
non seulement ne laissassent rien a desirer quant a l'exactitude,
mais qui formassent le monument de calcul 1e plus vaste et le
plus imposant qui eut jamais ete execute, ou meme concu. Les
logarithmes des nombres de 1 a 200.000 formaient a ce travail un
supplement necessaire et exige. Il fut aise a M. de Prony de
s'assurer que meme en s'associant trois ou quatre habiles
co-operateurs. La plus grande duree presumable de sa vie ne lui
sufirai pas pour remplir ses engagements. Il etait occupe de
cette facheuse pensee lorsque. Se trouvant devant la boutique
d'un marchand de livres. Il appercut la belle edition Anglaise de
Smith, donnee a Londres en 1776: il ouvrit le livre au hazard. et
tomba sur le premier chapitre, qui traite de la division du
travail, et ou la fabrication des epingles est citee pour
exemple. A peine avait-il parcouru les premieres pages, que, par
une espece d'inspiration. il concut l'expedient de mettre ses
logarithmes en manufacture comme les epingles. Il faisait en ce
moment, a l'ecole polytechnique, des lecons sur une partie
d'analyse liee a ce genre de travail, la methode des differences,
et ses applications a l'interpolation. Il alla passer quelques
jours a la campagne. et revint a Paris avec le plan de
fabrication. qui a ete suivi dans l'execution. Il rassembla deux
ateliers. qui faisai ent separement les memes calculs, et se
servaient de verification reciproque.(2*)

244. The ancient methods of computing tables were altogether
inapplicable to such a proceeding. M. Prony, therefore, wishing
to avail himself of all the talent of his country in devising new
methods, formed the first section of those who were to take part
in this enterprise out of five or six of the most eminent
mathematicians in France.

First section. The duty of this first section was to
investigate, amongst the various analytical expressions which
could be found for the same function, that which was most readily
adapted to simple numerical calculation by many individuals
employed at the same time. This section had little or nothing to
do with the actual numerical work. When its labours were
concluded, the formulae on the use of which it had decided, were
delivered to the second section.

Second section. This section consisted of seven or eight
persons of considerable acquaintance with mathematics: and their
duty was to convert into numbers the formulae put into their
hands by the first section an operation of great labour; and then
to deliver out these formulae to the members of the third
section, and receive from them the finished calculations. The
members of this second section had certain means of verifying the
calculations without the necessity of repeating, or even of
examining, the whole of the work done by the third section.

Third section. The members of this section, whose number
varied from sixty to eighty, received certain numbers from the
second section, and, using nothing more than simple addition and
subtraction, they returned to that section the tables in a
finished state. It is remarkable that nine-tenths of this class
had no knowledge of arithmetic beyond the two first rules which
they were thus called upon to exercise, and that these persons
were usually found more correct in their calculations, than those
who possessed a more extensive knowledge of the subject.

245. When it is stated that the tables thus computed occupy
seventeen large folio volumes, some idea may perhaps be formed of
the labour. From that part executed by the third class, which may
almost be termed mechanical, requiring the least knowledge and by
far the greatest exertions, the first class were entirely exempt.
Such labour can always be purchased at an easy rate. The duties
of the second class, although requiring considerable skill in
arithmetical operations, were yet in some measure relieved by the
higher interest naturally felt in those more difficult
operations. The exertions of the first class are not likely to
require, upon another occasion, so much skill and labour as they
did upon the first attempt to introduce such a method; but when
the completion of a calculating engine shall have produced a
substitute for the whole of the third section of computers, the
attention of analysts will naturally be directed to simplifying
its application, by a new discussion of the methods of converting
analytical formulae into numbers.

246. The proceeding of M. Prony, in this celebrated system of
calculation, much resembles that of a skilful person about to
construct a cotton or silk mill, or any similar establishment.
Having, by his own genius, or through the aid of his friends,
found that some improved machinery may be successfully applied to
his pursuit, he makes drawings of his plans of the machinery, and
may himself be considered as constituting the first section. He
next requires the assistance of operative engineers capable of
executing the machinery he has designed, some of whom should
understand the nature of the processes to be carried on; and
these constitute his second section. When a sufficient number of
machines have been made, a multitude of other persons, possessed
of a lower degree of skill, must be employed in using them; these
form the third section: but their work, and the just performance
of the machines, must be still superintended by the second class.

247. As the possibility of performing arithmetical
calculations by machinery may appear to non-mathematical readers
to be rather too large a postulate, and as it is connected with
the subject of the division of labour, I shall here endeavour, in
a few lines, to give some slight perception of the manner in
which this can be done--and thus to remove a small portion of
the veil which covers that apparent mystery.

248. That nearly all tables of numbers which follow any law,
however complicated, may be formed, to a greater or less extent,
solely by the proper arrangement of the successive addition and
subtraction of numbers befitting each table, is a general
principle which can be demonstrated to those only who are well
acquainted with mathematics; but the mind, even of the reader who
is but very slightly acquainted with that science, will readily
conceive that it is not impossible, by attending to the following
example.

The subjoined table is the beginning of one in very extensive
use, which has been printed and reprinted very frequently in many
countries, and is called a table of square numbers.


Terms of Table  A Table  B first Difference  C second Difference

        1           1
                                3
        2           4                           2
                                5
        3           9                           2
                                7
        4          16                           2
                                9
        5          25                           2
                               11
        6          36                           2
                               13
        7          49


Any number in the table, column A, may be obtained, by
multiplying the number which expresses the distance of that term
from the commencement of the table by itself; thus, 25 is the
fifth term from the beginning of the table, and 5 multiplied by
itself, or by 5, is equal to 25. Let us now subtract each term of
this table from the next succeeding term, and place the results
in another column (B), which may be called first difference
column. If we again subtract each term of this first difference
from the succeeding term, we find the result is always the number
2, (column C); and that the same number will always recur in that
column, which may be called the second difference, will appear to
any person who takes the trouble to carry on the table a few
terms further. Now when once this is admitted, it is quite clear
that, provided the first term (1) of the table, the first term
(3) of the first differences, and the first term (2) of the
second or constant difference, are originally given, we can
continue the table of square numbers to any extent, merely by
addition: for the series of first differences may be formed by
repeatedly adding the constant difference (2) to (3) the first
number in column B, and we then have the series of numbers, 3, 5,
6, etc.: and again, by successively adding each of these to the
first number (1) of the table, we produce the square numbers.

249. Having thus, I hope, thrown some light upon the
theoretical part of the question, I shall endeavour to shew that
the mechanical execution of such an engine, as would produce this
series of numbers, is not so far removed from that of ordinary
machinery as might be conceived.(3*) Let the reader imagine three
clocks, placed on a table side by side, each having only one
hand, and each having a thousand divisions instead of twelve
hours marked on the face; and every time a string is pulled, let
them strike on a bell the numbers of the divisions to which their
hands point. Let him further suppose that two of the clocks, for
the sake of distinction called B and C, have some mechanism by
which the clock C advances the hand of the clock B one division,
for each stroke it makes upon its own bell: and let the clock B
by a similar contrivance advance the hand of the clock A one
division, for each stroke it makes on its own bell. With such an
arrangement, having set the hand of the clock A to the division
I, that of B to III, and that of C to II, let the reader imagine
the repeating parts of the clocks to be set in motion continually
in the following order: viz.--pull the string of clock A; pull
the string of clock B; pull the string of clock C.

The table on the following page will then express the series
of movements and their results.

If now only those divisions struck or pointed at by the clock
A be attended to and written down, it will be found that they
produce the series of the squares of the natural numbers. Such a
series could, of course, be carried by this mechanism only so far
as the numbers which can be expressed by three figures; but this
may be sufficient to give some idea of the construction--and
was, in fact, the point to which the first model of the
calculating engine, now in progress, extended.

250. We have seen, then, that the effect of the division of
labour, both in mechanical and in mental operations, is, that it
enables us to purchase and apply to each process precisely that
quantity of skill and knowledge which is required for it: we
avoid employing any part of the time of a man who can get eight
or ten shillings a day by his skill in tempering needles, in
turning a wheel, which can be done for sixpence a day; and we
equally avoid the loss arising from the employment of an
accomplished mathematician in performing the lowest processes of
arithmetic.

251. The division of labour cannot be successfully practised
unless there exists a great demand for its produce; and it
requires a large capital to be employed in those arts in which it
is used. In watchmaking it has been carried, perhaps, to the
greatest extent. It was stated in evidence before a committee of
the House of Commons, that there are a hundred and two distinct
branches of this art, to each of which a boy may be put
apprentice: and that he only learns his master's department, and
is unable, after his apprenticeship has expired, without
subsequent instruction, to work at any other branch. The
watch-finisher, whose business is to put together the scattered
parts, is the only one, out of the hundred and two persons, who
can work in any other department than his own.

252. In one of the most difficult arts, that of mining, great
improvements have resulted from the judicious distribution of the
duties; and under the arrangments which have gradually been
introduced, the whole system of the mine and its government is
now placed under the control of the following officers.


1. A manager, who has the general knowledge of all that is to
be done, and who may be assisted by one or more skilful persons.

2. Underground captains direct the proper mining operations,
and govern the working miners.

3. The purser and book-keeper manage the accounts.

4. The engineer erects the engines, and superintends the men
who work them.

5. A chief pitman has charge of the pumps and the apparatus
of the shafts.

6. A surface-captain, with assistants, receives the ores
raised, and directs the dressing department, the object of which
is to render them marketable.

7. The head carpenter superintends many constructions.

8. The foreman of the smiths regulates the ironwork and
tools.

9. A materials man selects, purchases, receives and delivers
all articles required.

10. The roper has charge of ropes and cordage of all sorts.

Notes:

1. An Enquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations, by Adam Smith.

2. Note sur la publication, proposee par le gouvernement Anglais
des grandes tables logarithmiques et trigonometriques de M de
Prony De l'imprimerie de F. Didot, December 1, 1829, p. 7

3. Since the publication of the second edition of this work, one
portion of the engine which I have been constructing for some
years past has been put together. It calculates, in three
columns, a table with its first and second differences. Each
column can be expressed as far as five figures, so that these
fifteen figures constitute about one ninth part of the larger
engine. The ease and precision with which it works leave no room
to doubt its success in the more extended form. Besides tables of
squares, cubes, and portions of logarithmic tables, it possesses
the power of calculating certain series whose differences are not
constant; and it has already tabulated parts of series formed
from the following equations:

The third differential of ux = units figur of delta ux

The third differential of ux = nearest whole no. to (1/10,000
delta ux)

The subjoined is one amongst the series which it has calculated:

     0   3,486       42,972
     0   4,991       50,532
     1   6,907       58,813
    14   9,295       67,826
    70  12,236       77,602
   230  15,741       88,202
   495  19,861       99,627
   916  24,597      111,928
 1,504  30,010      125,116
 2,340  36,131      139,272

The general term of this is,

    ux = (x(x-1)(x-2))/(1 X 2 X 3) + the whole number in x/10 +
10 Sigma^3 (units figure of (x(x-1)/2)



Chapter 21

On the Cost of Each Separate Process in a Manufacture

253. The great competition introduced by machinery, and the
application of the principle of the subdivision of labour, render
it necessary for each producer to be continually on the watch, to
discover improved methods by which the cost of the article he
manufactures may be reduced; and, with this view, it is of great
importance to know the precise expense of every process, as well
as of the wear and tear of machinery which is due to it. The same
information is desirable for those by whom the manufactured goods
are distributed and sold; because it enables them to give
reasonable answers or explanations to the objections of
enquirers, and also affords them a better chance of suggesting to
the manufacturer changes in the fashion of his goods, which may
be suitable either to the tastes or to the finances of his
customers. To the statesman such knowledge is still more
important; for without it he must trust entirely to others, and
can form no judgement worthy of confidence, of the effect any tax
may produce, or of the injury the manufacturer or the country may
suffer by its imposition.

254. One of the first advantages which suggests itself as
likely to arise from a correct analysis of the expense of the
several processes of any manufacture, is the indication which it
would furnish of the course in which improvement should be
directed. If a method could be contrived of diminishing by one
fourth the time required for fixing on the heads of pins, the
expense of making them would be reduced about thirteen per cent;
whilst a reduction of one half the time employed in spinning the
coil of wire out of which the heads are cut, would scarcely make
any sensible difference in the cost of manufacturing of the
whole article. It is therefore obvious, that the attention would
be much more advantageously directed to shortening the former
than the latter process.

255. The expense of manufacturing, in a country where
machinery is of the rudest kind, and manual labour is very cheap,
is curiously exhibited in the price of cotton cloth in the island
of Java. The cotton, in the seed, is sold by the picul, which is
a weight of about 133 lbs. Not above one fourth or one fifth of
this weight, however, is cotton: the natives, by means of rude
wooden rollers, can only separate about 1 1/4 lb. of cotton from
the seed by one day's labour. A picul of cleansed cotton,
therefore, is worth between four and five times the cost of the
impure article; and the prices of the same substance, in its
different stages of manufacture, are--for one picul:

 Dollars Cotton in the seed 2 to 3
 Clean cotton 10 to 11
 Cotton thread 24
 Cotton thread dyed blue 35
 Good ordinary cotton cloth 50


Thus it appears that the expense of spinning in Java is 117
per cent on the value of the raw material; the expense of dying
thread blue is 45 per cent on its value; and that of weaving
cotton thread into cloth 117 per cent on its value. The expense
of spinning cotton into a fine thread is, in England, about 33
per cent. (1*)

256. As an example of the cost of the different processes of
a manufacture, perhaps an analytical statement of the expense of
the volume now in the reader's hands may not be uninteresting;
more especially as it will afford an insight into the nature and
extent of the taxes upon literature. It is found economical to
print it upon paper of a very large size, so that although
thirty-two pages, instead of sixteen, are really contained in
each sheet, this work is still called octavo.

                                    L s. d.

 To printer, for composing (per sheet of 32 pages) L3 1s. 10 1/2
sheets 32 0 6 [This relates to the ordinary size of the type used
in the volume.]

 To printer for composing small type, as in extracts and 2 0 3
contents, extra per sheet, 3s. 10d.

 To printer, for composing table work, extra per sheet, 2 17 9
5s. 6d.
 Average charge for corrections, per sheet, L3 2s. 10d. 33 0 0
 Press work, 3000 being printed off, per sheet, L3 10s. 36 15 0
 Paper for 3000, at L1 11s. 6d. per ream, weighing 28 lbs: the
duty on paper at 3d. per lb. amounts to 7s. per ream, so that the
63 reams which are required for the work will cost:

 Paper 77 3 6
 Excise Duty 22 1 0
 Total expense of paper 99 4 6

 Total expense of printing and paper 205 18 0
 Steel-plate for title-page 0 7 6
 Engraving on ditto, Head of Bacon 2 2 0
 Ditto letters 1 1 0
 Total expense of title-page 3 10 6
 Printing title-page, at 6s. per 100 9 0 0
 Paper for ditto, at 1s. 9d. per 100 2 12 6
 Expenses of advertising 40 0 0
 Sundries. 5 0 0

 Total expense in sheets 266 1 0

 Cost of a single copy in sheets; 3052 being printed, including
the overplus 0 1 9
 Extra boarding 0 0 6

 Cost of each copy, boarded(2*) 0 2 3


257. This analysis requires some explanation. The printer
usually charges for composition by the sheet, supposing the type
to be all of one kind; and as this charge is regulated by the
size of the letter, on which the quantity in a sheet depends,
little dispute can arise after the price is agreed upon. If there
are but few extracts, or other parts of the work, which require
to be printed in smaller type; or if there are many notes, or
several passages in Greek, or in other languages, requiring a
different type, these are considered in the original contract,
and a small additional price per sheet allowed. If there is a
large portion of small type, it is better to have a specific
additional charge for it per sheet. If any work with irregular
lines and many figures, and what the printers call rules, occurs,
it is called table work, and is charged at an advanced price per
sheet. Examples of this are frequent in the present volume. If
the page consists entirely of figures, as in mathematical tables,
which require very careful correction, the charge for composition
is usually doubled. A few years ago I printed a table of
logarithms, on a large-sized page, which required great
additional labour and care from the readers,(3*) in rendering the
proofs correct, and for which, although new punches were not
required, several new types were prepared, and for which
stereotype plates were cast, costing about L2 per sheet. In this
case L11 per sheet were charged, although ordinary composition,
with the same sized letter, in demy octavo, could have been
executed at thirty-eight shillings per sheet: but as the expense
was ascertained before commencing the work, it gave rise to no
difficulties.

258. The charge for corrections and alterations is one which,
from the difficulty of measuring them, gives rise to the greatest
inconvenience, and is as disagreeable to the publisher (if he be
the agent between the author and the printer), and to the master
printer or his foreman, as it is to the author himself. If the
author study economy, he should make the whole of his corrections
in the manuscript, and should copy it out fairly: it will then be
printed correctly, and he will have little to pay for
corrections. But it is scarcely possible to judge of the effect
of any passage correctly, without having it set up in type; and
there are few subjects, upon which an author does not find he can
add some details or explanation, when he sees his views in print.
If, therefore, he wish to save his own labour in transcribing,
and to give the last polish to the language, he must be content
to accomplish these objects at an increased expense. If the
printer possess a sufficient stock of type, it will contribute
still more to the convenience of the author to have his whole
work put up in what are technically called slips,(4*) and then to
make all the corrections, and to have as few revises as he can.
The present work was set up in slips, but the corrections have
been unusually large, and the revises frequent.

259. The press work, or printing off, is charged at a price
agreed upon for each two hundred and fifty sheets; and any broken
number is still considered as two hundred and fifty. When a large
edition is required, the price for two hundred and fifty is
reduced; thus, in the present volume, two hundred and fifty
copies, if printed alone, would have been charged eleven
shillings per sheet, instead of 5s. 10d., the actual charge. The
principle of this mode of charging is good, as it obviates all
disputes; but it is to be regretted that the custom of charging
the same price for any small number as for two hundred and fifty,
is so pertinaciously adhered to, that the workmen will not agree
to any other terms when only twenty or thirty copies are
required, or even when only three or four are wanted for the sake
of some experiment. Perhaps if all numbers above fifty were
charged as two hundred and fifty, and all below as for half two
hundred and fifty, both parties would derive an advantage.

260. The effect of the excise duty is to render the paper
thin, in order that it may weigh little; but this is counteracted
by the desire of the author to make his book look as thick as
possible, in order that he may charge the public as much as he
decently can; and so on that ground alone the duty is of no
importance. There is, however, another effect of this duty, which
both the public and the author feel; for they pay, not merely the
duty which is charged, but also the profit on that duty, which
the paper-maker requires for the use of additional capital; and
also the profit to the publisher and bookseller on the increased
price of the volume.

261. The estimated charge for advertisements is, in the
present case, about the usual allowance for such a volume; and,
as it is considered that advertisements in newspapers are the
most effectual, where the smallest pays a duty of 3s. 6d., nearly
one half of the charge of advertising is a tax.

262. It appears then, that, to an expenditure of L224
necessary to produce the present volume, L42 are added in the
shape of a direct tax. Whether the profits arising from such a
mode of manufacturing will justify such a rate of taxation, can
only be estimated when the returns from the volume are
considered, a subject that will be discussed in a subsequent
chapter.(5*) It is at present sufficient to observe, that the tax
on advertisements is an impolitic tax when contrasted with that
upon paper, and on other materials employed. The object of all
advertisements is, by making known articles for sale, to procure
for them a better price, if the sale is to be by auction; or a
larger extent of sale if by retail dealers. Now the more any
article is known, the more quickly it is discovered whether it
contributes to the comfort or advantage of the public; and the
more quickly its consumption is assured if it be found valuable.
It would appear, then, that every tax on communicating
information respecting articles which are the subjects of
taxation in another shape, is one which must reduce the amount
that would have been raised, had no impediment been placed in the
way of making known to the public their qualities and their
price.

NOTES:

1. These facts are taken from Crawford's Indian Archipelago.

2. These charges refer to the edition prepared for the public,
and do not relate to the large paper copies in the hands of some
of the author's friends.

3. Readers are persons employed to correct the press at the
printing office.

4. Slips are long pieces of paper on which sufficient matter is
printed to form, when divided, from two to four pages of text.

5. Chapter 31.



Chapter 22

On the Causes and Consequences of Large Factories

263. On examining the analysis which has been given in
chapter XIX of the operations in the art of pin-making, it will
be observed, that ten individuals are employed in it, and also
that the time occupied in executing the several processes is very
different. In order, however, to render more simple the reasoning
which follows, it will be convenient to suppose that each of the
seven processes there described requires an equal quantity of
time. This being supposed, it is at once apparent, that, to
conduct an establishment for pin-making most profitably, the
number of persons employed must be a multiple of ten. For if a
person with small means has only sufficient capital to enable him
to employ half that number of persons, they cannot each of them
constantly adhere to the execution of the same process; and if a
manufacturer employs any number not a multiple of ten, a similar
result must ensue with respect to some portion of them. The same
reflection constantly presents itself on examining any
well-arranged factory. In that of Mr Mordan, the patentee of the
ever-pointed pencils, one room is devoted to some of the
processes by which steel pens are manufactured. Six fly-presses
are here constantly at work; in the first a sheet of thin steel
is brought by the workman under the die which at each blow cuts
out a flat piece of the metal, having the form intended for the
pen. Two other workmen are employed in placing these flat pieces
under two other presses, in which a steel chisel cuts the slit.
Three other workmen occupy other presses, in which the pieces so
prepared receive their semi-cylindrical form. The longer time
required for adjusting the small pieces in the two latter
operations renders them less rapid in execution than the first;
so that two workmen are fully occupied in slitting, and three in
bending the flat pieces, which one man can punch out of the sheet
of steel. If, therefore, it were necessary to enlarge this
factory, it is clear that twelve or eighteen presses would be
worked with more economy than any number not a multiple of six.

The same reasoning extends to every manufacture which is
conducted upon the principle of the division of labour, and we
arrive at this general conclusion: When the number of processes
into which it is most advantageous to divide it, and the number
of individuals to be employed in it, are ascertained, then all
factories which do not employ a direct multiple of this latter
number, will produce the article at a greater cost. This
principle ought always to be kept in view in great
establishments, although it is quite impossible, even with the
best division of the labour, to attend to it rigidly in practice.
The proportionate number of the persons who possess the greatest
skill, is of course to be first attended to. That exact ratio
which is more profitable for a factory employing a hundred
workmen, may not be quite the best where there are five hundred;
and the arrangements of both may probably admit of variations,
without materially increasing the cost of their produce. But it
is quite certain that no individual, nor in the case of
pin-making could any five individuals, ever hope to compete with
an extensive establishment. Hence arises one cause of the great
size of manufacturing establishments, which have increased with
the progress of civilization. Other circumstances, however,
contribute to the same end, and arise also from the same cause--
the division of labour.

264. The material out of which the manufactured article is
produced, must, in the several stages of its progress, be
conveyed from one operator to the next in succession: this can be
done at least expense when they are all working in the same
establishment. If the weight of the material is considerable,
this reason acts with additional force; but even where it is
light, the danger arising from frequent removal may render it
desirable to have all the processes carried on in the same
building. In the cutting and polishing of glass this is the case;
whilst in the art of needle-making several of the processes are
carried on in the cottages of the workmen. It is, however, clear
that the latter plan, which is attended with some advantages to
the family of the workmen, can be adopted only where there exists
a sure and quick method of knowing that the work has been well
done, and that the whole of the materials given out have been
really employed.

265. The inducement to contrive machines for any process of
manufacture increases with the demand for the article; and the
introduction of machinery, on the other hand, tends to increase
the quantity produced and to lead to the establishment of large
factories. An illustration of these principles may be found in
the history of the manufacture of patent net.

The first machines for weaving this article were very
expensive, costing from a thousand to twelve or thirteen hundred
pounds. The possessor of one of these, though it greatly
increased the quantity he could produce, was nevertheless unable,
when working eight hours a day, to compete with the old methods.
This arose from the large capital invested in the machinery; but
he quickly perceived that with the same expense of fixed capital,
and a small addition to his circulating capital, he could work
the machine during the whole twenty-four hours. The profits thus
realized soon induced other persons to direct their attention to
the improvement of those machines; and the price was greatly
reduced, at the same time that the rapidity of production of the
patent net was increased. But if machines be kept working through
the twenty-four hours, it is necessary that some person shall
attend to admit the workmen at the time they relieve each other;
and whether the porter or other servant so employed admit one
person or twenty, his rest will be equally disturbed. It will
also be necessary occasionally to adjust or repair the machine;
and this can be done much better by a workman accustomed to
machine-making, than by the person who uses it. Now, since the
good performance and the duration of machines depend to a very
great extent upon correcting every shake or imperfection in their
parts as soon as they appear, the prompt attention of a workman
resident on the spot will considerably reduce the expenditure
arising from the wear and tear of the machinery. But in the case
of single lace frame, or a single loom, this would be too
expensive a plan. Here then arises another circumstance which
tends to enlarge the extent of a factory. It ought to consist of
such a number of machines as shall occupy the whole time of one
workman in keeping them in order: if extended beyond that number,
the same principle of economy would point out the necessity of
doubling or tripling the number of machines, in order to employ
the whole time of two or three skilful workmen.

266. Where one portion of the workman's labour consists in
the exertion of mere physical force, as in weaving and in many
similar arts, it will soon occur to the manufacturer, that if
that part were executed by a steam-engine, the same man might, in
the case of weaving, attend to two or more looms at once; and,
since we already suppose that one or more operative engineers
have been employed, the number of his looms may be so arranged
that their time shall be fully occupied in keeping the
steam-engine and the looms in order. One of the first results
will be, that the looms can be driven by the engine nearly twice
as fast as before: and as each man, when relieved from bodily
labour, can attend to two looms, one workman can now make almost
as much cloth as four. This increase of producing power is,
however, greater than that which really took place at first; the
velocity of some of the parts of the loom being limited by the
strength of the thread, and the quickness with which it commences
its motion: but an improvement was soon made, by which the motion
commenced slowly, and gradually acquired greater velocity than it
was safe to give it at once; and the speed was thus increased
from 100 to about 120 strokes per minute.

267. Pursuing the same principles, the manufactory becomes
gradually so enlarged, that the expense of lighting during the
night amounts to a considerable sum; and as there are already
attached to the establishment persons who are up all night, and
can therefore constantly attend to it, and also engineers to make
and keep in repair any machinery, the addition of an apparatus
for making gas to light the factory leads to a new extension, at
the same time that it contributes, by diminishing the expense of
lighting, and the risk of accidents from fire, to reduce the cost
of manufacturing.

268. Long before a factory has reached this extent, it will
have been found necessary to establish an accountant's
department, with clerks to pay the workmen, and to see that they
arrive at their stated times; and this department must be in
communication with the agents who purchase the raw produce, and
with those who sell the manufactured article.

269. We have seen that the application of the division of
labour tends to produce cheaper articles; that it thus increases
the demand; and gradually, by the effect of competition, or by
the hope of increased gain, that it causes large capitals to be
embarked in extensive factories. Let us now examine the influence
of this accumulation of capital directed to one object. In the
first place, it enables the most important principle on which the
advantages of the division of labour depends to be carried almost
to its extreme limits: not merely is the precise amount of skill
purchased which is necessary for the execution of each process,
but throughout every stage--from that in which the raw material
is procured, to that by which the finished produce is conveyed
into the hands of the consumer--the same economy of skill
prevails. The quantity of work produced by a given number of
people is greatly augmented by such an extended arrangement; and
the result is necessarily a great reduction in the cost of the
article which is brought to market.

270. Amongst the causes which tend to the cheap production of
any article, and which are connected with the employment of
additional capital, may be mentioned, the care which is taken to
prevent the absolute waste of any part of the raw material. An
attention to this circumstance sometimes causes the union of two
trades in one factory, which otherwise might have been separated.

An enumeration of the arts to which the horns of cattle are
applicable, will furnish a striking example of this kind of
economy. The tanner who has purchased the raw hides, separates
the horns, and sells them to the makers of combs and lanterns.
The horn consists of two parts, an outward horny case, and an
inward conical substance, somewhat intermediate between indurated
hair and bone. The first process consists in separating these two
parts, by means of a blow against a block of wood. The horny
exterior is then cut into three portions with a frame-saw.

1. The lowest of these, next the root of the horn, after
undergoing several processes, by which it is flattened, is made
into combs.

2. The middle of the horn, after being flattened by heat, and
having its transparency improved by oil, is split into thin
layers, and forms a substitute for glass, in lanterns of the
commonest kind.

3. The tip of the horn is used by the makers of knife
handles, and of the tops of whips, and for other similar
purposes.

4. The interior, or core of the horn, is boiled down in
water. A large quantity of fat rises to the surface; this is put
aside, and sold to the makers of yellow soap.

5. The liquid itself is used as a kind of glue, and is
purchased by cloth dressers for stiffening.

6. The insoluble substance, which remains behind, is then
sent to the mill, and, being ground down, is sold to the farmers
for manure.

7. Besides these various purposes to which the different
parts of the horn are applied, the clippings, which arise in comb
making, are sold to the farmer for manure. In the first year
after they are spread over the soil they have comparatively
little effect, but during the next four or five their efficiency
is considerable. The shavings which form the refuse of the
lantern maker, are of a much thinner texture: some of them are
cut into various figures and painted, and used as toys; for being
hygrometric, they curl up when placed on the palm of a warm hand.
But the greater part of these shavings also are sold for manure,
and from their extremely thin and divided form, the full effect
is produced upon the first crop.

271. Another event which has arisen, in one trade at least,
from the employment of large capital, is, that a class of
middlemen, formerly interposed between the maker and the
merchant, now no longer exist. When calico was woven in the
cottages of the workmen, there existed a class of persons who
travelled about and purchased the pieces so made, in large
numbers, for the purpose of selling them to the exporting
merchant. But the middlemen were obliged to examine every piece,
in order to know that it was perfect, and of full measure. The
greater number of the workmen, it is true, might be depended
upon, but the fraud of a few would render this examination
indispensable: for any single cottager, though detected by one
purchaser, might still hope that the fact would not become known
to all the rest.

The value of character, though great in all circumstances of
life, can never be so fully experienced by persons possessed of
small capital, as by those employing much larger sums: whilst
these larger sums of money for which the merchant deals, render
his character for punctuality more studied and known by others.
Thus it happens that high character supplies the place of an
additional portion of capital; and the merchant, in dealing with
the great manufacturer, is saved from the expense of
verification, by knowing that the loss, or even the impeachment,
of the manufacturer's character, would be attended with greater
injury to himself than any profit upon a single transaction could
compensate.

272. The amount of well-grounded confidence, which exists in
the character of its merchants and manufacturers, is one of the
many advantages that an old manufacturing country always
possesses over its rivals. To such an extent is this confidence
in character carried in England, that, at one of our largest
towns, sales and purchases on a very extensive scale are made
daily in the course of business without any of the parties ever
exchanging a written document.

273. A breach of confidence of this kind, which might have
been attended with very serious embarrassment, occurred in the
recent expedition to the mouth of the Niger.

'We brought with us from England,' Mr Lander states, 'nearly
a hundred thousand needles of various sizes, and amongst them was
a great quantity of Whitechapel sharps warranted superfine, and
not to cut in the eye. Thus highly recommended, we imagined that
these needles must have been excellent indeed; but what was our
surprise, some time ago, when a number of them which we had
disposed of were returned to us, with a complaint that they were
all eyeless, thus redeeming with a vengeance the pledge of the
manufacturer, "that they would not cut in the eye". On
examination afterwards, we found the same fault with the
remainder of the "Whitechapel sharps", so that to save our credit
we have been obliged to throw them away.'(1*)

274. The influence of established character in producing
confidence operated in a very remarkable manner at the time of
the exclusion of British manufactures from the continent during
the last war. One of our largest establishments had been in the
habit of doing extensive business with a house in the centre of
Germany; but, on the closing of the continental ports against our
manufactures, heavy penalties were inflicted on all those who
contravened the Berlin and Milan decrees. The English
manufacturer continued, nevertheless, to receive orders, with
directions how to consign them, and appointments for the time and
mode of payment, in letters, the handwriting of which was known
to him, but which were never signed, except by the christian name
of one of the firm, and even in some instances they were without
any signature at all. These orders were executed; and in no
instance was there the least irregularity in the payments.

275. Another circumstance may be noticed, which to a small
extent is more advantageous to large than to small factories. In
the export of several articles of manufacture, a drawback is
allowed by government, of a portion of the duty paid on the
importation of the raw material. In such circumstances, certain
forms must be gone through in order to protect the revenue from
fraud; and a clerk, or one of the partners, must attend at the
custom-house. The agent of the large establishment occupies
nearly the same time in receiving a drawback of several
thousands, as the smaller exporter does of a few shillings. But
if the quantity exported is inconsiderable, the small
manufacturer frequently does not find the drawback will repay him
for the loss of time.

276. In many of the large establishments of our manufacturing
districts, substances are employed which are the produce of
remote countries, and which are, in several instances, almost
peculiar to a few situations. The discovery of any new locality,
where such articles exist in abundance, is a matter of great
importance to any establishment which consumes them in large
quantities; and it has been found, in some instances, that the
expense of sending persons to great distances, purposely to
discover and to collect such produce, has been amply repaid. Thus
it has happened, that the snowy mountains of Sweden and Norway,
as well as the warmer hills of Corsica, have been almost stripped
of one of their vegetable productions, by agents sent expressly
from one of our largest establishments for the dying of calicos.
Owing to the same command of capital, and to the scale upon which
the operations of large factories are carried on, their returns
admit of the expense of sending out agents to examine into the
wants and tastes of distant countries, as well as of trying
experiments, which, although profitable to them, would be ruinous
to smaller establishments possessing more limited resources.

These opinions have been so well expressed in the Report of
the Committee of the House of Commons on the Woollen Trade, in
1806, that we shall close this chapter with an extract, in which
the advantages of great factories are summed up.

Your committee have the satisfaction of seeing, that the
apprehensions entertained of factories are not only vicious in
principle, but they are practically erroneous: to such a degree.
that even the very opposite principles might be reasonably
entertained. Nor would it be difficult to prove, that the
factories, to a certain extent at least, and in the present day,
seem absolutely necessary to the wellbeing of the domestic
system: supplying those very particulars wherein the domestic
system must be acknowledged to be inherently defective: for it is
obvious, that the little master manufacturers cannot afford, like
the man who possesses considerable capital, to try the
experiments which are requisite, and incur the risks, and even
losses, which almost always occur, in inventing and perfecting
new articles of manufacture, or in carrying to a state of greater
perfection articles already established. He cannot learn, by
personal inspection, the wants and habits, the arts,
manufactures, and improvements of foreign countries; diligence,
economy, and prudence, are the requisites of his character, not
invention, taste, and enterprise: nor would he be warranted in
hazarding the loss of any part of his small capital. He walks in
a sure road as long as he treads in the beaten track; but he must
not deviate into the paths of speculation. The owner of a
factory, on the contrary, being commonly possessed of a large
capital, and having all his workmen employed under his own
immediate superintendence, may make experiments, hazard
speculation, invent shorter or better modes of performing old
processes, may introduce new articles, and improve and perfect
old ones, thus giving the range to his taste and fancy, and,
thereby alone enabling our manufacturers to stand the competition
with their commercial rivals in other countries. Meanwhile, as is
well worthy of remark (and experience abundantly warrants the
assertion), many of these new fabrics and inventions, when their
success is once established, become general amongst the whole
body of manufacturers: the domestic manufacturers themselves thus
benefiting, in the end, from those very factories which had been
at first the objects of their jealousy. The history of almost all
our other manufactures, in which great improvements have been
made of late years in some cases at an immense expense, and after
numbers of unsuccessful experiments, strikingly illustrates and
enforces the above remarks. It is besides an acknowledged fact,
that the owners of factories are often amongst the most extensive
purchasers at the halls, where they buy from the domestic
clothier the established articles of manufacture, or are able at
once to answer a great and sudden order; whilst, at home, and
under their own superintendence, they make their fancy goods, and
any articles of a newer, more costly, or more delicate quality,
to which they are enabled by the domestic system to apply a much
larger proportion of their capital. Thus, the two systems,
instead of rivalling, are mutual aids to each other: each
supplying the other's defects, and promoting the other's
prosperity.

Notes:

1. Lander's Journal of an Expedition to the Mouth of the Niger,
vol. ii., p. 42.



Chapter 23

On the Position of Large Factories

277. It is found in every country, that the situation of
large manufacturing establishments is confined to particular
districts. In the earlier history of a manufacturing community,
before cheap modes of transport have been extensively introduced,
it will almost always be found that manufactories are placed near
those spots in which nature has produced the raw material:
especially in the case of articles of great weight, and in those
the value of which depends more upon the material than upon the
labour expended on it. Most of the metallic ores being
exceedingly heavy, and being mixed up with large quantities of
weighty and useless materials, must be smelted at no great
distance from the spot which affords them: fuel and power are the
requisites for reducing them; and any considerable fall of water
in the vicinity will naturally be resorted to for aid in the
coarser exertions of physical force; for pounding the ore, for
blowing the furnaces, or for hammering and rolling out the iron.
There are indeed peculiar circumstances which will modify this.
Iron, coal, and limestone, commonly occur in the same tracts; but
the union of the fuel in the same locality with the ore does not
exist with respect to other metals. The tracts generally the most
productive of metallic ores are, geologically speaking, different
from those affording coal: thus in Cornwall there are veins of
copper and of tin, but no beds of coal. The copper ore, which
requires a very large quantity of fuel for its reduction, is sent
by sea to the coalfields of Wales, and is smelted at Swansea;
whilst the vessels which convey it, take back coals to work the
steam-engines for draining the mines, and to smelt the tin, which
requires for that purpose a much smaller quantity of fuel than
copper.

278. Rivers passing through districts rich in coal and
metals, will form the first highroads for the conveyance of
weighty produce to stations in which other conveniences present
themselves for the further application of human skill. Canals
will succeed, or lend their aid to these; and the yet unexhausted
applications of steam and of gas, hold out a hope of attaining
almost the same advantages for countries to which nature seemed
for ever to have denied them. Manufactures, commerce, and
civilization, always follow the line of new and cheap
communications. Twenty years ago, the Mississippi poured the vast
volume of its waters in lavish profusion through thousands of
miles of countries, which scarcely supported a few wandering and
uncivilized tribes of Indians. The power of the stream seemed to
set at defiance the efforts of man to ascend its course; and, as
if to render the task still more hopeless, large trees, torn from
the surrounding forests, were planted like stakes in its bottom,
forming in some places barriers, in others the nucleus of banks;
and accumulating in the same spot, which but for accident would
have been free from both, the difficulties and dangers of shoals
and of rocks. Four months of incessant toil could scarcely convey
a small bark with its worn-out crew two thousand miles up this
stream. The same voyage is now performed in fifteen days by large
vessels impelled by steam, carrying hundreds of passengers
enjoying all the comforts and luxuries of civilized life. Instead
of the hut of the Indian, and the far more unfrequent log house
of the thinly scattered settlers--villages, towns, and cities,
have arisen on its banks; and the same engine which stems the
force of these powerful waters, will probably tear from their
bottom the obstructions which have hitherto impeded and rendered
dangerous their navigation.(1*)

279. The accumulation of many large manufacturing
establishments in the same district has a tendency to bring
together purchasers or their agents from great distances, and
thus to cause the institution of a public mart or exchange. This
contributes to diffuse information relative to the supply of raw
materials, and the state of demand for their produce, with which
it is necessary manufacturers should be well acquainted. The very
circumstance of collecting periodically, at one place, a large
number both of those who supply the market and of those who
require its produce, tends strongly to check the accidental
fluctuations to which a small market is always subject, as well
as to render the average of the prices much more uniform.

280. When capital has been invested in machinery, and in
buildings for its accommodation, and when the inhabitants of the
neighbourhood have acquired a knowledge of the modes of working
at the machines, reasons of considerable weight are required to
cause their removal. Such changes of position do however occur;
and they have been alluded to by the Committee on the Fluctuation
of Manufacturers' Employment, as one of the causes interfering
most materially with an uniform rate of wages: it is therefore of
particular importance to the workmen to be acquainted with the
real causes which have driven manufactures from their ancient
seats.

"The migration or change of place of any manufacture has
sometimes arisen from improvements of machinery not applicable to
the spot where such manufacture was carried on, as appears to
have been the case with the woollen manufacture, which has in
great measure migrated from Essex, Suffolk, and other southern
counties, to the northern districts, where coal for the use of
the steam-engine is much cheaper. But this change has, in some
instances, been caused or accelerated by the conduct of the
workmen, in refusing a reasonable reduction of wages, or opposing
the introduction of some kind of improved machinery or process;
so that, during the dispute, another spot has in great measure
supplied their place in the market. Any violence used by the
workmen against the property of their masters, and any
unreasonable combination on their part, is almost sure thus to be
injurious to themselves."

281. These removals become of serious consequence when the
factories have been long established, because a population
commensurate with their wants invariably grows up around them.
The combinations in Nottinghamshire, of persons under the name of
Luddites, drove a great number of lace frames from that district,
and caused establishments to be formed in Devonshire. We ought
also to observe, that the effect of driving any establishment
into a new district, where similar works have not previously
existed, is not merely to place it out of the reach of such
combinations; but, after a few years, the example of its success
will most probably induce other capitalists in the new district
to engage in the same manufacture: and thus, although one
establishment only should be driven away, the workmen, through
whose combination its removal is effected, will not merely suffer
by the loss of that portion of demand for their labour which the
factory caused; but the value of that labour will itself be
reduced by the competition of a new field of production.

282. Another circumstance which has its influence on this
question, is the nature of the machinery. Heavy machinery, such
as stamping-mills, steam-engines, etc., cannot readily be moved,
and must always be taken to pieces for that purpose; but when the
machinery of a factory consists of a multitude of separate
engines, each complete in itself, and all put in motion by one
source of power, such as that of steam, then the removal is much
less inconvenient. Thus, stocking frames, lace machines, and
looms, can be transported to more favourable positions, with but
a small separation of their parts.

283. It is of great importance that the more intelligent
amongst the class of workmen should examine into the correctness
of these views; because, without having their attention directed
to them, the whole class may, in some instances, be led by
designing persons to pursue a course, which, although plausible
in appearance, is in reality at variance with their own best
interests. I confess I am not without a hope that this volume may
fall into the hands of workmen, perhaps better qualified than
myself to reason upon a subject which requires only plain common
sense, and whose powers are sharpened by its importance to their
personal happiness. In asking their attention to the preceding
remarks, and to those which I shall offer respecting
combinations, I can claim only one advantage over them; namely,
that I never have had, and in all human probability never shall
have, the slightest pecuniary interest, to influence even
remotely, or by anticipation, the judgements I have formed on the
facts which have come before me.

NOTES:

1. The amount of obstructions arising from the casual fixing of
trees in the bottom of the river, may be estimated from the
proportion of steamboats destroyed by running upon them. The
subjoined statement is taken from the American Almanack for 1832.

Between the years 1811 and 1831, three hundred and
forty-eight steamboats were built on the Mississippi and its
tributary streams. During that period a hundred and fifty were
lost or worn out.

Of this hundred and fifty: worn out         63
                           lost by snags    36
                           burnt            14
                           lost by collision 3
                           by accidents not ascertained 34
Thirty six or nearly one fourth, being destroyed by accidental
obstruction.

Snag is the name given in America to trees which stand nearly
upright in the stream with their roots fixed at the bottom.

It is usual to divide off at the bow of the steamboats a
watertight chamber, in order that when a hole is made in it by
running against the snags, the water may not enterthe rest of the
vessel and sink it intantly.



Chapter 24

On Over Manufacturing

284. One of the natural and almost inevitable consequences of
competition is the production of a supply much larger than the
demand requires. This result usually arises periodically; and it
is equally important, both to the masters and to the workmen, to
prevent its occurrence, or to foresee its arrival. In situations
where a great number of very small capitalists exist--where each
master works himself and is assisted by his own family, or by a
few journeymen--and where a variety of different articles is
produced, a curious system of compensation has arisen which in
some measure diminishes the extent to which fluctuations of wages
would otherwise reach. This is accomplished by a species of
middlemen or factors, persons possessing some capital, who,
whenever the price of any of the articles in which they deal is
greatly reduced, purchase it on their own account, in the hopes
of selling at a profit when the market is better. These persons,
in ordinary times, act as salesmen or agents, and make up
assortments of goods at the market price, for the use of the home
or foreign dealer. They possess large warehouses in which to make
up their orders, or keep in store articles purchased during
periods of depression; thus acting as a kind of flywheel in
equalizing the market price.

285. The effect of over-manufacturing upon great
establishments is different. When an over supply has reduced
prices, one of two events usually occurs: the first is a
diminished payment for labour; the other is a diminution of
the number of hours during which the labourers work,
together with a diminished rate of wages. In the former case
production continues to go on at its ordinary rate: in the
latter, the production itself being checked, the supply
again adjusts itself to the demand as soon as the stock on
hand is worked off, and prices then regain their former
level. The latter course appears, in the first instance, to
be the best both for masters and men; but there seems to be
a difficulty in accomplishing this, except where the trade
is in few hands. In fact, it is almost necessary, for its
success, that there should be a combination amongst the
masters or amongst the men; or, what is always far
preferable to either, a mutual agreement for their joint
interests. Combination amongst the men is difficult, and is
always attended with the evils which arise from the ill-will
excited against any persons who, in the perfectly
justifiable exercise of their judgement, are disposed not to
act with the majority. The combination of the masters, on
the other hand, is unavailing, unless the whole body of them
agree, for if any one master can procure more labour for his
money than the rest, he will be able to undersell them.

286. If we look only at the interests of the consumer, the
case is different. When too large a supply has produced a great
reduction of price, it opens the consumption of the article to a
new class, and increases the consumption of those who previously
employed it: it is therefore against the interest of both these
parties that a return to the former price should occur. It is
also certain, that by the diminution of profit which the
manufacturer suffers from the diminished price, his ingenuity
will be additionally stimulated; that he will apply himself to
discover other and cheaper sources for the supply of his raw
material; that he will endeavour to contrive improved machinery
which shall manufacture it at a cheaper rate; or try to introduce
new arrangements into his factory, which shall render the economy
of it more perfect. In the event of his success, by any of these
courses or by their joint effects, a real and substantial good
will be produced. A larger portion of the public will receive
advantage from the use of the article, and they will procure it
at a lower price; and the manufacturer, though his profit on each
operation is reduced, will yet, by the more frequent returns on
the larger produce of his factory, find his real gain at the end
of the year, nearly the same as it was before; whilst the wages
of the workman will return to their level, and both the
manufacturer and the workman will find the demand less
fluctuating, from its being dependent on a larger number of
customers.

287. It would be highly interesting, if we could trace, even
approximately, through the history of any great manufacture, the
effects of gluts in producing improvements in machinery, or in
methods of working; and if we could shew what addition to the
annual quantity of goods previously manufactured, was produced by
each alteration. It would probably be found, that the increased
quantity manufactured by the same capital, when worked with the
new improvement, would produce nearly the same rate of profit as
other modes of investment.

Perhaps the manufacture of iron(1*) would furnish the best
illustration of this subject; because, by having the actual price
of pig and bar iron at the same place and at the same time, the
effect of a change in the value of currency, as well as several
other sources of irregularity, would be removed.

288. At the present moment, whilst the manufacturers of iron
are complaining of the ruinously low price of their produce, a
new mode of smelting iron is coming into use, which, if it
realizes the statement of the patentees, promises to reduce
greatly the cost of production.

The improvement consists in heating the air previously to
employing it for blowing the furnace. One of the results is, that
coal may be used instead of coke; and this, in its turn,
diminishes the quantity of limestone which is required for the
fusion of the iron stone.

The following statement by the proprietors of the patent is
extracted from Brewster's Journal, 1832, p. 349:

Comparative view of the quantity of materials required at the
Clyde iron works to smelt a ton of foundry pig-iron, and of the
quantity of foundry pig-iron smelted from each furnace weekly

Fuel in tons of 20 cwt each cwt 112 lbs; Iron-stone; Lime-stone
Cwt; Weekly produce in pig-iron Tons

1. With air not heated and coke; 7;3 1/4; 15; 45
2. With air heated and coke; 4 3/4; 3 1/4; 10; 60
3. With air heated and coals not coked; 2 1/4; 3 1/4; 7 1/2; 65

Notes. 1. To the coals stated in the second and third lines, must
be added 5 cwt of small coals, required to heat the air.

2. The expense of the apparatus for applying the heated air
will be from L200 to L300 per furnace.

3. No coals are now coked at the Clyde iron works; at all the
three furnaces the iron is smelted with coals.

4. The three furnaces are blown by a double-powered
steam-engine, with a steam cylinder 40 inches in diameter, and a
blowing cylinder 80 inches in diameter, which compresses the air
so as to carry 2 1/2 lbs per square inch. There are two tuyeres
to each furnace. The muzzles of the blowpipes are 3 inches in
diameter.

5. The air heated to upwards of 600 degrees  of Fahrenheit.
It will melt lead at the distance of three inches from the
orifice through which it issues from the pipe.

289. The increased effect produced by thus heating the air is
by no means an obvious result; and an analysis of its action will
lead to some curious views respecting the future application of
machinery for blowing furnaces.

Every cubic foot of atmospheric air, driven into a furnace,
consists of two gases.(2*) about one-fifth being oxygen, and
four-fifths azote.

According to the present state of chemical knowledge, the
oxygen alone is effective in producing heat; and the operation of
blowing a furnace may be thus analysed.

1. The air is forced into the furnace in a condensed state,
and, immediately expanding, abstracts heat from the surrounding
bodies.

2. Being itself of moderate temperature, it would, even
without expansion, still require heat to raise it to the
temperature of the hot substances to which it is to be applied.

3. On coming into contact with the ignited substances in the
furnace, the oxygen unites with them, parting at the same moment
with a large portion of its latent heat, and forming compounds
which have less specific heat than their separate constituents.
Some of these pass up the chimney in a gaseous state, whilst
others remain in the form of melted slags, floating on the
surface of the iron, which is fused by the heat thus set at
liberty.

4. The effects of the azote are precisely similar to the
first and second of those above described; it seems to form no
combinations, and contributes nothing, in any stage, to augment
the heat.

The plan, therefore, of heating the air before driving it
into the furnace saves, obviously, the whole of that heat which
the fuel must have supplied in raising it from the temperature
of the external air up to that of 600 degrees  Fahrenheit; thus
rendering the fire more intense, and the glassy slags more
fusible, and perhaps also more effectually decomposing the iron
ore. The same quantity of fuel, applied at once to the furnace,
would only prolong the duration of its heat, not augment its
intensity.

290. The circumstance of so large a portion of the air(3*)
driven into furnaces being not merely useless, but acting really
as a cooling, instead of a heating, cause, added to so great a
waste of mechanical power in condensing it, amounting, in fact,
to four-fifths of the whole, clearly shews the defects of the
present method, and the want of some better mode of exciting
combustion on a large scale. The following suggestions are thrown
out as likely to lead to valuable results, even though they
should prove ineffectual for their professed object.

291. The great difficulty appears to be to separate the
oxygen, which aids combustion, from the azote which impedes it.
If either of those gases becomes liquid at a lower pressure than
the other, and if those pressures are within the limits of our
present powers of compression, the object might be accomplished.

Let us assume, for example, that oxygen becomes liquid under
a pressure of 200 atmospheres, whilst azote requires a pressure
of 250. Then if atmospheric air be condensed to the two hundredth
part of its bulk, the oxygen will be found in a liquid state at
the bottom of the vessel in which the condensation is effected,
and the upper part of the vessel will contain only azote in the
state of gas. The oxygen, now liquefied, may be drawn off for the
supply of the furnace; but as it ought when used, to have a very
moderate degree of condensation, its expansive force may be
previously employed in working a small engine. The compressed
azote also in the upper part of the vessel, though useless for
combustion, may be employed as a source of power, and, by its
expansion, work another engine. By these means the mechanical
force exerted in the original compression would all be restored,
except that small part retained for forcing the pure oxygen into
the furnace, and the much larger part lost in the friction of the
apparatus.

292. The principal difficulty to be apprehended in these
operations is that of packing a working piston so as to bear the
pressure of 200 or 300 atmospheres: but this does not seem
insurmountable. It is possible also that the chemical combination
of the two gases which constitute common air may be effected by
such pressures: if this should be the case, it might offer a new
mode of manufacturing nitrous or nitric acids. The result of such
experiments might take another direction: if the condensation
were performed over liquids, it is possible that they might enter
into new chemical combinations. Thus, if air were highly
condensed in a vessel containing water, the latter might unite
with an additional dose of oxygen, (4*) which might afterwards
be easily disengaged for the use of the furnace.

293. A further cause of the uncertainty of the results of
such an experiment arises from the possibility that azote may
really contribute to the fusion of the mixed mass in the furnace,
though its mode of operating is at present unknown. An
examination of the nature of the gases issuing from the chimneys
of iron-foundries, might perhaps assist in clearing up this
point; and, in fact, if such enquiries were also instituted upon
the various products of all furnaces, we might expect the
elucidation of many points in the economy of the metallurgic art.

294. It is very possible also, that the action of oxygen in a
liquid state might be exceedingly corrosive, and that the
containing vessels must be lined with platinum or some other
substance of very difficult oxydation; and most probably new and
unexpected compounds would be formed at such pressures. In some
experiments made by Count Rumford in 1797, on the force of fired
gunpowder, he noticed a solid compound, which always appeared in
the gunbarrel when the ignited powder had no means of escaping;
and, in those cases, the gas which escaped on removing the
restraining pressure was usually inconsiderable.

295. If the liquefied gases are used, the form of the iron
furnace must probably be changed, and perhaps it may be necessary
to direct the flame from the ignited fuel upon the ore to be
fused, instead of mixing that ore with the fuel itself: by a
proper regulation of the blast, an oxygenating or a deoxygenating
flame might be procured; and from the intensity of the flame,
combined with its chemical agency, we might expect the most
refractory ore to be smelted, and that ultimately the metals at
present almost infusible, such as platinum, titanium, and others,
might be brought into common use, and thus effect a revolution in
the arts.

296. Supposing, on the occurrence of a glut, that new and
cheaper modes of producing are not discovered, and that the
production continues to exceed the demand, then it is apparent
that too much capital is employed in the trade; and after a time,
the diminished rate of profit will drive some of the
manufacturers to other occupations. What particular individuals
will leave it must depend on a variety of circumstances. Superior
industry and attention will enable some factories to make a
profit rather beyond the rest; superior capital in others will
enable them, without these advantages, to support competition
longer, even at a loss, with the hope of driving the smaller
capitalists out of the market, and then reimbursing themselves by
an advanced price. It is, however, better for all parties, that
this contest should not last long; and it is important, that no
artificial restraint should interfere to prevent it. An instance
of such restriction, and of its injurious effect, occurs at the
port of Newcastle, where a particular Act of Parliament requires
that every ship shall be loaded in its turn. The Committee of the
House of Commons, in their Report on the Coal Trade, state that,

 'Under the regulations contained in this Act, if more ships
enter into the trade than can be profitablv employed in it, the
loss produced by detention in port, and waiting for a cargo.
which must consequently take place, instead of falling, as it
naturally would, upon particular ships, and forcing them from the
trade, is now divided evenly amongst them; and the loss thus
created is shared by the whole number.' Report, p. 6.

 297. It is not pretended, in this short view, to trace out all
the effects or remedies of over-manufacturing; the subject is
difficult, and, unlike some of the questions already treated,
requires a combined view of the relative influence of many
concurring causes.

NOTES:

1. The average price per ton of pig iron, bar iron, and coal,
together with the price paid for labour at the works, for a long
series of years, would be very valuable, and I shall feel much
indebted to anyone who will favour me with it for any, even
short, period.

2. The accurate proportions are, by measure, oxygen 21, azote 79.

3. A similar reasoning may be applied to lamps. An Argand burner,
whether used for consuming oil or gas, admits almost an unlimited
quantity of air. It would deserve enquiry, whether a smaller
quantity might not produce greater light; and, possibly, a
different supply furnish more heat with the same expenditure of
fuel.

4. Deutoxide of hydrogen, the oxygenated water of Thenard.



Chapter 25

Enquiries Previous to Commencing any Manufactory

298. There are many enquiries which ought always to be made
previous to the commencement of the manufacture of any new
article. These chiefly relate to the expense of tools, machinery,
raw materials, and all the outgoings necessary for its
production; to the extent of demand which is likely to arise; to
the time in which the circulating capital will be replaced; and
to the quickness or slowness with which the new article will
supersede those already in use.

299. The expense of tools and of new machines will be more
difficult to ascertain, in proportion as they differ from those
already employed; but the variety in constant use in our various
manufactories, is such, that few inventions now occur in which
considerable resemblance may not be traced to others already
constructed. The cost of the raw material is usually less
difficult to determine; but cases occasionally arise in which it
becomes important to examine whether the supply, at the given
price, can be depended upon: for, in the case of a small
consumption, the additional demand arising from a factory may
produce a considerable temporary rise, though it may ultimately
reduce the price.

300. The quantity of any new article likely to be consumed is
a most important subject for the consideration of the projector
of a new manufacture. As these pages are not intended for the
instruction of the manufacturer, but rather for the purpose of
giving a general view of the subject, an illustration of the way
in which such questions are regarded by practical men, will,
perhaps, be most instructive. The following extract from the
evidence given before a Committee of the House of Commons, in the
Report on Artizans and Machinery, shews the extent to which
articles apparently the most insignificant, are consumed, and the
view which the manufacturer takes of them.

The person examined on this occasion was Mr Ostler, a
manufacturer of glass beads and other toys of the same substance,
from Birmingham. Several of the articles made by him were placed
upon the table, for the inspection of the Committee of the House
of Commons, which held its meetings in one of the
committee-rooms.

Question. Is there any thing else you have to state upon this
subject?
Answer. Gentlemen may consider the articles on the table as
extremely insignificant: but perhaps I may surprise them a
little, by mentioning the following fact. Eighteen years ago, on
my first journey to London, a respectable-looking man, in the
city, asked me if I could supply him with dolls' eyes; and I was
foolish enough to feel half offended; I thought it derogatory to
my new dignity as a manufacturer, to make dolls' eyes. He took me
into a room quite as wide, and perhaps twice the length of this,
and we had just room to walk between stacks, from the loor to the
ceiling, of parts of dolls. He said, 'These are only the legs and
arms; the trunks are below., But I saw enough to convince me,
that he wanted a great many eyes; and, as the article appeared
quite in my own line of business, I said I would take an order by
way of experiment; and he shewed me several specimens. I copied
the order. He ordered various quantities, and of various sizes
and qualities. On returning to the Tavistock Hotel, I found that
the order amounted to upwards of 500l. I went into the country,
and endeavoured to make them. I had some of the most ingenious
glass toymakers in the kingdom in my service; but when I shewed
it to them, they shook their heads, and said they had often seen
the article before, but could not make it. I engaged them by
presents to use their best exertions; but after trying and
wasting a great deal of time for three or four weeks, I was
obliged to relinquish the attempt. Soon afterwards I engaged in
another branch of business (chandelier furniture), and took no
more notice of it. About eighteen months ago I resumed the
trinket trade, and then determined to think of the dolls' eyes;
and about eight months since, I accidentally met with a poor
fellow who had impoverished himself by drinking, and who was
dying in a consumption, in a state of great want. I showed him
ten sovereigns: and he said he would instruct me in the process.
He was in such a state that he could not bear the effluvia of his
own lamp, but though I was very conversant with the manual part
of the business, and it related to things I was daily in the
habit of seeing, I felt I could do nothing from his description.
(I mention this to show how difficult it is to convey, by
description, the mode of working.) He took me into his garret,
where the poor fellow had economized to such a degree, that he
actually used the entrails and fat of poultry from Leadenhall
market to save oil (the price of the article having been lately
so much reduced by competition at home). In an instant, before I
had seen him make three, I felt competent to make a gross; and
the difference between his mode and that of my own workmen was so
trifling, that I felt the utmost astonishment.

Question. You can now make dolls' eyes?
Answer. I can. As it was eighteen years ago that I received the
order I have mentioned, and feeling doubtful of my own
recollection, though very strong, and suspecting that it could
[not] have been to the amount stated, I last night took the
present very reduced price of that article (less than half now of
what it was then), and calculating that every child in this
country not using a doll till two years old, and throwing it
aside at seven, and having a new one annually, I satisfied myself
that the eyes alone would produce a circulation of a great many
thousand pounds. I mention this merely to shew the importance of
trifles; and to assign one reason, amongst many, for my
conviction that nothing but personal communication can enable
our manufactures to be transplanted.

301. In many instances it is exceedingly difficult to
estimate beforehand the sale of an article, or the effects of a
machine; a case, however, occurred during a recent enquiry, which
although not quite appropriate as an illustration of probable
demand, is highly instructive as to the mode of conducting
investigations of this nature. A committee of the House of
Commons was appointed to enquire into the tolls proper to be
placed on steam-carriages; a question, apparently, of difficult
solution, and upon which widely different opinions had been
formed, if we may judge by the very different rate of tolls
imposed upon such carriages by different 'turnpike trusts'. The
principles on which the committee conducted the enquiry were,
that 'The only ground on which a fair claim to toll can be made
on any public road, is to raise a fund, which, with the strictest
economy, shall be just sufficient--first, to repay the expense
of its original formation; secondly, to maintain it in good and
sufficient repair.' They first endeavoured to ascertain, from
competent persons, the effect of the atmosphere alone in
deteriorating a well-constructed road. The next step was, to
determine the proportion in which the road was injured, by the
effect of the horses' feet compared with that of the wheels. Mr
Macneill, the superintendent, under Mr Telford, of the Holyhead
roads, was examined, and proposed to estimate the relative
injury, from the comparative quantities of iron worn off from the
shoes of the horses, and from the tire of the wheels. From the
data he possessed, respecting the consumption of iron for the
tire of the wheels, and for the shoes of the horses, of one of
the Birmingham day-coaches, he estimated the wear and tear of
roads, arising from the feet of the horses, to be three times as
great as that arising from the wheels. Supposing repairs
amounting to a hundred pounds to be required on a road travelled
over by a fast coach at the rate of ten miles an hour, and the
same amount of injury to occur on another road, used only by
waggons, moving at the rate of three miles an hour, Mr Macneill
divides the injuries in the following proportions:

 Injuries arising from;  Fast coach; Heavy waggon
 Atmospheric changes         20         20
 Wheels                      20         35.5
 Horses' feet drawing        60         44.5
 Total injury               100        100


Supposing it, therefore, to be ascertained that the wheels of
steam carriages do no more injury to roads than other carriages
of equal weight travelling with the same velocity, the committee
now possessed the means of approximating to a just rate of toll
for steam carriages.(1*)

302. As connected with this subject, and as affording most
valuable information upon points in which, previous to
experiment, widely different opinions have been entertained; the
following extract is inserted from Mr Telford's Report on the
State of the Holyhead and Liverpool Roads. The instrument
employed for the comparison was invented by Mr Macneill; and the
road between London and Shrewsbury was selected for the place of
experiment.

The general results, when a waggon weighing 21 cwt was used
on different sorts of roads, are as follows:

                                        lbs
1. On well-made pavement, the draught is 33

2. On a broken stone surface, or old flint road 65

3. On a gravel road 147

4. On a broken stone road, upon a rough pavement foundation 46

5. On a broken stone surface, upon a bottoming of concrete,
formed of Parker's cement and gravel 46

The following statement relates to the force required to draw a
coach weighing 18 cwt. exclusive of seven passengers, up roads of
various inclinations:

Inclination; Force required at six miles per hour; Force at
eight miles per hour; Force at ten miles per hour

            lbs     lbs     lbs
 1 in  20   268     296     318
 1 in  26   213     219     225
 1 in  30   165     196     200
 1 in  40   160     166     172
 1 in 600   111     120     128


303. In establishing a new manufactory, the time in which the
goods produced can be brought to market and the returns be
realized, should be thoroughly considered, as well as the time
the new article will take to supersede those already in use. If
it is destroyed in using, the new produce will be much more
easily introduced. Steel pens readily took the place of quills;
and a new form of pen would, if it possessed any advantage, as
easily supersede the present one. A new lock, however secure, and
however cheap, would not so readily make its way. If less
expensive than the old, it would be employed in new work: but old
locks would rarely be removed to make way for it; and even if
perfectly secure, its advance would be slow.

304. Another element in this question which should not be
altogether omitted, is the opposition which the new manufacture
may create by its real or apparent injury to other interests, and
the probable effect of that opposition. This is not always
foreseen; and when anticipated is often inaccurately estimated.
On the first establishment of steamboats from London to Margate,
the proprietors of the coaches running on that line of road
petitioned the House of Commons against them, as likely to lead
to the ruin of the coach proprietors. It was, however, found that
the fear was imaginary; and in a very few years, the number of
coaches on that road was considerably increased, apparently
through the very means which were thought to be adverse to it.
The fear, which is now entertained, that steampower and railroads
may drive out of employment a large proportion of the horses at
present in use, is probably not less unfounded. On some
particular lines such an effect might be produced; but in all
probability the number of horses employed in conveying goods and
passengers to the great lines of railroad, would exceed that
which is at present used.

NOTES:

1. One of the results of these enquiries is, that every coach
which travels from London to Birmingham distributes about eleven
pounds of wrought iron, along with the line of road between the
two places.



Chapter 26

On a New System of Manufacturing

305. A most erroneous and unfortunate opinion prevails
amongst workmen in many manufacturing countries, that their own
interest and that of their employers are at variance. The
consequences are that valuable machinery is sometimes neglected,
and even privately injured--that new improvements, introduced by
the masters, do not receive a fair trial--and that the talents
and observations of the workmen are not directed to the
improvement of the processes in which they are employed. This
error is, perhaps, most prevalent where the establishment of
manufactories has been of recent origin, and where the number of
persons employed in them is not very large: thus, in some of the
Prussian provinces on the Rhine it prevails to a much greater
extent than in Lancashire. Perhaps its diminished prevalence in
our own manufacturing districts, arises partly from the superior
information spread amongst the workmen; and partly from the
frequent example of persons, who by good conduct and an attention
to the interests of their employers for a series of years, have
become foremen, or who have ultimately been admitted into
advantageous partnerships. Convinced as I am, from my own
observation, that the prosperity and success of the master
manufacturer is essential to the welfare of the workman, I am yet
compelled to admit that this connection is, in many cases, too
remote to be always understood by the latter, and whilst it is
perfectly true that workmen, as a class, derive advantage from
the prosperity of their employers, I do not think that each
individual partakes of that advantage exactly in proportion to
the extent to which he contributes towards it; nor do I perceive
that the resulting advantage is as immediate as it might become
under a different system.

306. It would be of great importance, if, in every large
establishment the mode of payment could be so arranged, that
every person employed should derive advantage from the success of
the whole; and that the profits of each individual should
advance, as the factory itself produced profit, without the
necessity of making any change in the wages. This is by no means
easy to effect, particularly amongst that class whose daily
labour procures for them their daily food. The system which has
long been pursued in working the Cornish mines, although not
exactly fulfilling these conditions, yet possesses advantages
which make it worthy of attention, as having nearly approached
towards them, and as tending to render fully effective the
faculties of all who are engaged in it. I am the more strongly
induced to place before the reader a short sketch of this system,
because its similarity to that which I shall afterwards recommend
for trial, will perhaps remove some objections to the latter, and
may also furnish some valuable hints for conducting any
experiment which might be undertaken.

307. In the mines of Cornwall, almost the whole of the
operations, both above and below ground, are contracted for. The
manner of making the contract is nearly as follows. At the end of
every two months, the work which it is proposed to carry on
during the next period is marked out. It is of three kinds. 1.
Tutwork, which consists in sinking shafts, driving levels, and
making excavations: this is paid for by the fathom in depth, or
in length, or by the cubic fathom. 2. Tribute, which is payment
for raising and dressing the ore, by means of a certain part of
its value when rendered merchantable. It is this mode of payment
which produces such admirable effects. The miners, who are to be
paid in proportion to the richness of the vein, and the quantity
of metal extracted from it, naturally become quicksighted in the
discovery of ore, and in estimating its value; and it is their
interest to avail themselves of every improvement that can bring
it more cheaply to market. 3. Dressing. The 'Tributors', who dig
and dress the ore, can seldom afford to dress the coarser parts
of what they raise, at their contract price; this portion,
therefore, is again let out to other persons, who agree to dress
it at an advanced price.

The lots of ore to be dressed, and the works to be carried
on, having been marked out some days before, and having been
examined by the men, a kind of auction is held by the captains of
the mine, in which each lot is put up, and bid for by different
gangs of men. The work is then offered, at a price usually below
that bid at the auction, to the lowest bidder, who rarely
declines it at the rate proposed. The tribute is a certain sum
out of every twenty shillings' worth of ore raised, and may vary
from threepence to fourteen or fifteen shillings. The rate of
earnings in tribute is very uncertain: if a vein, which was poor
when taken, becomes rich, the men earn money rapidly; and
instances have occurred in which each miner of a gang has gained
a hundred pounds in the two months. These extraordinary cases,
are, perhaps, of more advantage to the owners of the mine than
even to the men; for whilst the skill and industry of the workmen
are greatly stimulated, the owner himself always derives still
greater advantage from the improvement of the vein.(1*) This
system has been introduced, by Mr Taylor, into the lead mines of
Flintshire, into those at Skipton in Yorkshire, and into some of
the copper mines of Cumberland; and it is desirable that it
should become general, because no other mode of payment affords
to the workmen a measure of success so directly proportioned to
the industry, the integrity, and the talent, which they exert.

308. I shall now present the outline of a system which
appears to me to be pregnant with the most important results,
both to the class of workmen and to the country at large; and
which, if acted upon, would, in my opinion, permanently raise the
working classes, and greatly extend the manufacturing system.

The general principles on which the proposed system is
founded, are

1. That a considerable part of the wages received by each
person employed should depend on the profits made by the
establishment; and,

2. That every person connected with it should derive more
advantage from applying any improvement he might discover, to the
factory in which he is employed, than he could by any other
course.

309. It would be difficult to prevail on the large capitalist
to enter upon any system, which would change the division of the
profits arising from the employment of his capital in setting
skill and labour in action; any alteration, therefore, must be
expected rather from the small capitalist, or from the higher
class of workmen, who combine the two characters; and to these
latter classes, whose welfare will be first affected, the change
is most important. I shall therefore first point out the course
to be pursued in making the experiment; and then, taking a
particular branch of trade as an illustration, I shall examine
the merits and defects of the proposed system as applied to it.

310. Let us suppose, in some large manufacturing town, ten or
twelve of the most intelligent and skilful workmen to unite,
whose characters for sobriety and steadiness are good, and are
well known among their own class. Such persons will each possess
some small portion of capital; and let them join with one or two
others who have raised themselves into the class of small master
manufacturers, and, therefore possess rather a larger portion of
capital. Let these persons, after well considering the subject,
agree to establish a manufactory of fire-irons and fenders; and
let us suppose that each of the ten workmen can command forty
pounds, and each of the small capitalists possesses two hundred
pounds: thus they have a capital of L800 with which to commence
business; and, for the sake of simplifying, let us further
suppose the labour of each of these twelve persons to be worth
two pounds a week. One portion of their capital will be expended
in procuring the tools necessary for their trade, which we shall
take at L400, and this must be considered as their fixed capital.
The remaining L400 must be employed as circulating capital, in
purchasing the iron with which their articles are made, in paying
the rent of their workshops, and in supporting themselves and
their families until some portion of it is replaced by the sale
of the goods produced.

311. Now the first question to be settled is, what proportion
of the profit should be allowed for the use of capital, and what
for skill and labour? It does not seem possible to decide this
question by any abstract reasoning: if the capital supplied by
each partner is equal, all difficulty will be removed; if
otherwise, the proportion must be left to find its level, and
will be discovered by experience; and it is probable that it will
not fluctuate much. Let us suppose it to be agreed that the
capital of L800 shall receive the wages of one workman. At the
end of each week every workman is to receive one pound as wages,
and one pound is to be divided amongst the owners of the capital.
After a few weeks the returns will begin to come in; and they
will soon become nearly uniform. Accurate accounts should be kept
of every expense and of all the sales; and at the end of each
week the profit should be divided. A certain portion should be
laid aside as a reserved fund, another portion for repair of the
tools, and the remainder being divided into thirteen parts, one
of these parts would be divided amongst the capitalists and one
belong to each workman. Thus each man would, in ordinary
circumstances, make up his usual wages of two pounds weekly. If
the factory went on prosperously, the wages of the men would
increase; if the sales fell off they would be diminished. It is
important that every person employed in the establishment,
whatever might be the amount paid for his services, whether he
act as labourer or porter, as the clerk who keeps the accounts,
or as bookkeeper employed for a few hours once a week to
superintend them, should receive one half of what his service is
worth in fixed salary, the other part varying with the success of
the undertaking.

312. In such a factory, of course, division of labour would
be introduced: some of the workmen would be constantly employed
in forging the fire-irons, others in polishing them, others in
piercing and forming the fenders. It would be essential that the
time occupied in each process, and also its expense, should be
well ascertained; information which would soon be obtained very
precisely. Now, if a workman should find a mode of shortening any
of the processes, he would confer a benefit on the whole party,
even if they received but a small part of the resulting profit.
For the promotion of such discoveries, it would be desirable that
those who make them should either receive some reward, to be
determined after a sufficient trial by a committee assembling
periodically; or if they be of high importance, that the
discoverer should receive one-half, or twothirds, of the profit
resulting from them during the next year, or some other
determinate period, as might be found expedient. As the
advantages of such improvements would be clear gain to the
factory, it is obvious that such a share might be allowed to the
inventor, that it would be for his interest rather to give the
benefit of them to his partners, than to dispose of them in any
other way.

313. The result of such arrangements in a factory would be,

1. That every person engaged in it would have a direct
interest in its prosperity; since the effect of any success, or
falling off, would almost immediately produce a corresponding
change in his own weekly receipts.

2. Every person concerned in the factory would have an
immediate interest in preventing any waste or mismanagement in
all the departments.

3. The talents of all connected with it would be strongly
directed to its improvement in every department.

4. None but workmen of high character and qualifications
could obtain admission into such establishments; because when any
additional hands were required, it would be the common interest
of all to admit only the most respectable and skilful; and it
would be far less easy to impose upon a dozen workmen than upon
the single proprietor of a factory.

5. When any circumstance produced a glut in the market, more
skill would be directed to diminishing the cost of production;
and a portion of the time of the men might then be occupied in
repairing and improving their tools, for which a reserved fund
would pay, thus checking present, and at the same time
facilitating future production.

6. Another advantage, of no small importance, would be the
total removal of all real or imaginary causes for combinations.
The workmen and the capitalist would so shade into each other--
would so evidently have a common interest, and their difficulties
and distresses would be mutually so well understood that, instead
of combining to oppress one another, the only combination which
could exist would be a most powerful union between both parties
to overcome their common difficulties.

314. One of the difficulties attending such a system is, that
capitalists would at first fear to embark in it, imagining that
the workmen would receive too large a share of the profits: and
it is quite true that the workmen would have a larger share than
at present: but, at the same time, it is presumed the effect of
the whole system would be, that the total profits of the
establishment being much increased, the smaller proportion
allowed to capital under this system would yet be greater in
actual amount, than that which results to it from the larger
share in the system now existing.

315. It is possible that the present laws relating to
partnerships might interfere with factories so conducted. If this
interference could not be obviated by confining their purchases
under the proposed system to ready money, it would be desirable
to consider what changes in the law would be necessary to its
existence: and this furnishes another reason for entering into
the question of limited partnerships.

316. A difficulty would occur also in discharging workmen who
behaved ill, or who were not competent to their work; this would
arise from their having a certain interest in the reserved fund,
and, perhaps, from their possessing a certain portion of the
capital employed; but without entering into detail, it may be
observed, that such cases might be determined on by meetings of
the whole establishment; and that if the policy of the laws
favoured such establishments, it would scarcely be more difficult
to enforce just regulations, than it now is to enforce some which
are unjust, by means of combinations either amongst the masters
or the men.

317. Some approach to this system is already practised in
several trades: the mode of conducting the Cornish mines has
already been alluded to; the payment to the crew of whaling ships
is governed by this principle; the profits arising from fishing
with nets on the south coast of England are thus divided:
one-half the produce belongs to the owner of the boat and net;
the other half is divided in equal portions between the persons
using it, who are also bound to assist in repairing the net when
injured.

NOTES:

1. For a detailed account of the method of working the Cornish
mines, see a paper of Mr John Taylor's Transactions of the
Geological Society, vol. ii, p. 309.



Chapter 27

On Contriving Machinery

318. The power of inventing mechanical contrivances, and of
combining machinery, does not appear, if we may judge from the
frequency of its occurrence, to be a difficult or a rare gift. Of
the vast multitude of inventions which have been produced almost
daily for a series of years, a large part has failed from the
imperfect nature of the first trials; whilst a still larger
portion, which had escaped the mechanical difficulties, failed
only because the economy of their operations was not sufficiently
attended to.

The commissioners appointed to examine into the methods
proposed for preventing the forgery of bank-notes, state in their
report, that out of one hundred and seventy-eight projects
communicated to the bank and to the commissioners, there were
only twelve of superior skill, and nine which it was necessary
more particularly to examine.

319. It is however a curious circumstance, that although the
power of combining machinery is so common, yet the more beautiful
combinations are exceedingly rare. Those which command our
admiration equally by the perfection of their effects and the
simplicity of their means, are found only amongst the happiest
productions of genius.

To produce movements even of a complicated kind is not
difficult. There exist a great multitude of known contrivances
for all the more usual purposes, and if the exertion of moderate
power is the end of the mechanism to be contrived, it is possible
to construct the whole machine upon paper, and to judge of the
proper strength to be given to each part as well as to the
framework which supports it, and also of its ultimate effect,
long before a single part of it has been executed. In fact, all
the contrivance, and all the improvements, ought first to be
represented in the drawings.

320. On the other hand, there are effects dependent upon
physical or chemical properties for the determination of which no
drawings will be of any use. These are the legitimate objects of
direct trial. For example; if the ultimate result of an engine is
to be that it shall impress letters on a copperplate by means of
steel punches forced into it, all the mechanism by which the
punches and the copper are to be moved at stated intervals, and
brought into contact, is within the province of drawing, and the
machinery may be arranged entirely upon paper. But a doubt may
reasonably spring up, whether the bur that will be raised round
the letter, which has been already punched upon the copper, may
not interfere with the proper action of the punch for the letter
which is to be punched next adjacent to it. It may also be feared
that the effect of punching the second letter, if it be
sufficiently near to the first, may distort the form of that
first figure. If neither of these evils should arise, still the
bur produced by the punching might be expected to interfere with
the goodness of the impression produced by the copperplate; and
the plate itself, after having all but its edge covered with
figures, might change its form, from the unequal condensation
which it must suffer in this process, so as to render it very
difficult to take impressions from it at all. It is impossible by
any drawings to solve difficulties such as these, experiment
alone can determine their effect. Such experiments having been
made, it is found that if the sides of the steel punch are nearly
at right angles to the face of the letter, the bur produced is
very inconsiderable; that at the depth which is sufficient for
copperplate printing, no distortion of the adjacent letters takes
place, although those letters are placed very close to each
other; that the small bur which arises may easily be scraped off;
and that the copperplate is not distorted by the condensation of
the metal in punching, but is perfectly fit to print from, after
it has undergone that process.

321. The next stage in the progress of an invention, after
the drawings are finished and the preliminary experiments have
been made, if any such should be requisite, is the execution of
the machine itself. It can never be too strongly impressed upon
the minds of those who are devising new machines, that to make
the most perfect drawings of every part tends essentially both to
the success of the trial, and to economy in arriving at the
result. The actual execution from working drawings is
comparatively an easy task; provided always that good tools are
employed, and that methods of working are adopted, in which the
perfection of the part constructed depends less on the personal
skill of the workman, than upon the certainty of the method
employed.

322. The causes of failure in this stage most frequently
derive their origin from errors in the preceding one; and it is
sufficient merely to indicate a few of their sources. They
frequently arise from having neglected to take into consideration
that metals are not perfectly rigid but elastic. A steel cylinder
of small diameter must not be regarded as an inflexible rod; but
in order to ensure its perfect action as an axis, it must be
supported at proper intervals.

Again, the strength and stiffness of the framing which
supports the mechanism must be carefully attended to. It should
always be recollected, that the addition of superfluous matter to
the immovable parts of a machine produces no additional momentum,
and therefore is not accompanied with the same evil that arises
when the moving parts are increased in weight. The stiffness of
the framing in a machine produces an important advantage. If the
bearings of the axis (those places at which they are supported)
are once placed in a straight line, they will remain so, if the
framing be immovable; whereas if the framework changes its form,
though ever so slightly, considerable friction is immediately
produced. This effect is so well understood in the districts
where spinning factories are numerous, that, in estimating the
expense of working a new factory, it is allowed that five per
cent on the power of the steam-engine will be saved if the
building is fireproof: for the greater strength and rigidity of a
fireproof building prevents the movement of the long shafts or
axes which drive the machinery, from being impeded by the
friction that would arise from the slightest deviation in any of
the bearings.

323. In conducting experiments upon machinery, it is quite a
mistake to suppose that any imperfect mechanical work is good
enough for such a purpose. If the experiment is worth making, it
ought to be tried with all the advantages of which the state of
mechanical art admits; for an imperfect trial may cause an idea
to be given up, which better workmanship might have proved to be
practicable. On the other hand, when once the efficiency of a
contrivance has been established, with good workmanship it will
be easy afterwards to ascertain the degree of perfection which
will suffice for its due action.

324. It is partly owing to the imperfection of the original
trials, and partly to the gradual improvements in the art of
making machinery, that many inventions which have been tried, and
given up in one state of art, have at another period been
eminently successful. The idea of printing by means of moveable
types had probably suggested itself to the imagination of many
persons conversant with impressions taken either from blocks or
seals. We find amongst the instruments discovered in the remains
of Pompeii and Herculaneum, stamps for words formed out of one
piece of metal, and including several letters. The idea of
separating these letters, and of recombining them into other
words, for the purpose of stamping a book, could scarcely have
failed to occur to many: but it would almost certainly have been
rejected by those best acquainted with the mechanical arts of
that time; for the workmen of those days must have instantly
perceived the impossibility of producing many thousand pieces of
wood or metal, fitting so perfectly and ranging so uniformly, as
the types or blocks of wood now used in the art of printing.

The principle of the press which bears the name of Bramah,
was known about a century and a half before the machine, to which
it gave rise, existed; but the imperfect state of mechanical art
in the time of the discoverer, would have effectually deterred
him, if the application of it had occurred to his mind, from
attempting to employ it in practice as an instrument for exerting
force.

These considerations prove the propriety of repeating, at the
termination of intervals during which the art of making machinery
has received any great improvement, the trails of methods which,
although founded upon just principles, had previously failed.

325. When the drawings of a machine have been properly made,
and the parts have been well executed, and even when the work it
produces possesses all the qualities which were anticipated,
still the invention may fail; that is, it may fail of being
brought into general practice. This will most frequently arise
from the circumstance of its producing its work at a greater
expense than that at which it can be made by other methods.

326. Whenever the new, or improved machine, is intended to
become the basis of a manufacture, it is essentially requisite
that the whole expense attending its operations should be fully
considered before its construction is undertaken. It is almost
always very difficult to make this estimate of the expense: the
more complicated the mechanism, the less easy is the task; and in
cases of great complexity and extent of machinery it is almost
impossible. It has been estimated roughly, that the first
individual of any newly invented machine, will cost about five
times as much as the construction of the second, an estimate
which is, perhaps, sufficiently near the truth. If the second
machine is to be precisely like the first, the same drawings, and
the same patterns will answer for it; but if, as usually happens,
some improvements have been suggested by the experience of the
first, these must be more or less altered. When, however, two or
three machines have been completed, and many more are wanted,
they can usually be produced at much less than one-fifth of the
expense of the original invention.

327. The arts of contriving, of drawing, and of executing, do
not usually reside in their greatest perfection in one
individual; and in this, as in other arts, the division of labour
must be applied. The best advice which can be offered to a
projector of any mechanical invention, is to employ a respectable
draughtsman; who, if he has had a large experience in his
profession, will assist in finding out whether the contrivance is
new, and can then make working drawings of it. The first step,
however, the ascertaining whether the contrivance has the merit
of novelty, is most important; for it is a maxim equally just in
all the arts, and in every science, that the man who aspires to
fortune or to fame by new discoveries, must be content to examine
with care the knowledge of his contemporaries, or to exhaust his
efforts in inventing again, what he will most probably find has
been better executed before.

328. This, nevertheless, is a subject upon which even
ingenious men are often singularly negligent. There is, perhaps,
no trade or profession existing in which there is so much
quackery, so much ignorance of the scientific principles, and of
the history of their own art, with respect to its resources and
extent, as are to be met with amongst mechanical projectors. The
self-constituted engineer, dazzled with the beauty of some,
perhaps, really original contrivance, assumes his new profession
with as little suspicion that previous instruction, that thought
and painful labour, are necessary to its successful exercise, as
does the statesman or the senator. Much of this false confidence
arises from the improper estimate which is entertained of the
difficulty of invention in mechanics. It is, therefore, of great
importance to the individuals and to the families of those who
are too often led away from more suitable pursuits, the dupes of
their own ingenuity and of the popular voice, to convince both
them and the public that the power of making new mechanical
combinations is a possession common to a multitude of minds, and
that the talents which it requires are by no means of the highest
order. It is still more important that they should be impressed
with the conviction that the great merit, and the great success
of those who have attained to eminence in such matters, was
almost entirely due to the unremitted perseverance with which
they concentrated upon their successful inventions the skill and
knowledge which years of study had matured.



Chapter 28

Proper Circumstances for the Application of Machinery

329. The first object of machinery, the chief cause of its
extensive utility, is the perfection and the cheap production of
the articles which it is intended to make. Whenever it is
required to produce a great multitude of things, all of exactly
the same kind, the proper time has arrived for the construction
of tools or machines by which they may be manufactured. If only a
few pairs of cotton stockings should be required, it would be an
absurd waste of time, and of capital, to construct a
stocking-frame to weave them, when, for a few pence, four steel
wires can be procured by which they may be knit. If, on the other
hand, many thousand pairs were wanted, the time employed, and the
expense incurred in constructing a stocking-frame, would be more
than repaid by the saving of time in making that large number of
stockings. The same principle is applicable to the copying of
letters: if three or four copies only are required, the pen and
the human hand furnish the cheapest means of obtaining them; if
hundreds are called for, lithography may be brought to our
assistance; but if hundreds of thousands are wanted, the
machinery of a printing establishment supplies the most
economical method of accomplishing the object.

330. There are, however, many cases in which machines or
tools must be made, in which economical production is not the
most important object. Whenever it is required to produce a few
articles parts of machinery, for instance, which must be executed
with the most rigid accuracy or be perfectly alike--it is nearly
impossible to fulfil this condition, even with the aid of the
most skilful hands: and it becomes necessary to make tools
expressly for the purpose, although those tools should, as
frequently happens, cost more in constructing than the things
they are destined to make.

331. Another instance of the just application of machinery,
even at an increased expense, arises where the shortness of time
in which the article is produced, has an important influence on
its value. In the publication of our daily newspapers, it
frequently happens that the debates in the Houses of Parliament
are carried on to three and four o'clock in the morning, that is.
to within a very few hours of the time for the publication of the
paper. The speeches must be taken down by reporters, conveyed by
them to the establishment of the newspaper, perhaps at the
distance of one or two miles, transcribed by them in the office,
set up by the compositor, the press corrected, and the paper be
printed off and distributed, before the public can read them.
Some of these journals have a circulation of from five to ten
thousand daily. Supposing four thousand to be wanted, and that
they could be printed only at the rate of five hundred per hour
upon one side of the paper, (which was the greatest number two
journeymen and a boy could take off by the old hand presses),
sixteen hours would be required for printing the complete
edition; and the news conveyed to the purchasers of the latest
portion of the impression, would be out of date before they could
receive it. To obviate this difficulty, it was often necessary to
set up the paper in duplicate, and sometimes, when late, in
triplicate: but the improvements in the printing machines have
been so great, that four thousand copies are now printed on one
side in an hour.

332. The establishment of 'The Times' newspaper is an
example, on a large scale, of a manufactory in which the division
of labour, both mental and bodily, is admirably illustrated, and
in which also the effect of domestic economy is well exemplified.
It is scarcely imagined by the thousands who read that paper in
various quarters of the globe, what a scene of organized activity
the factory presents during the whole night, or what a quantity
of talent and mechanical skill is put in action for their
amusement and information. (1*) Nearly a hundred persons are
employed in this establishment; and, during the session of
Parliament, at least twelve reporters are constantly attending
the Houses of Commons and Lords; each in his turn retiring, after
about an hour's work, to translate into ordinary writing, the
speech he has just heard and noted in shorthand. In the meantime
fifty compositors are constantly at work, some of whom have
already set up the beginning, whilst others are committing to
type the yet undried manuscript of the continuation of a speech,
whose middle portion is travelling to the office in the pocket of
the hasty reporter, and whose eloquent conclusion is, perhaps, at
that very moment, making the walls of St Stephen's vibrate with
the applause of its hearers. These congregated types, as fast as
they are composed, are passed in portions to other hands; till at
last the scattered fragments of the debate, forming, when united
with the ordinary matter, eight-and-forty columns, reappear in
regular order on the platform of the printing-press. The hand of
man is now too slow for the demands of his curiosity, but the
power of steam comes to his assistance. Ink is rapidly supplied
to the moving types, by the most perfect mechanism; four
attendants incessantly introduce the edges of large sheets of
white paper to the junction of two great rollers, which seem to
devour them with unsated appetite; other rollers convey them to
the type already inked, and having brought them into rapid and
successive contact, redeliver them to four other assistants,
completely printed by the almost momentary touch. Thus, in one
hour, four thousand sheets of paper are printed on one side; and
an impression of twelve thousand copies, from above three hundred
thousand moveable pieces of metal, is produced for the public in
six hours.

333. The effect of machinery in printing other periodical
publications, and of due economy in distributing them, is so
important for the interests of knowledge, that it is worth
examining by what means it is possible to produce them at the
small price at which they are sold. 'Chambers' Journal', which is
published at Edinburgh, and sold at three halfpence a number,
will furnish an example. Soon after its commencement in 1832, the
sale in Scotland reached 30,000, and in order to supply the
demand in London it was reprinted; but on account of the expense
of 'composition' it was found that this plan would not produce
any profit, and the London edition was about to be given up, when
it occurred to the proprietor to stereotype it at Edinburgh, and
cast two copies of the plates. This is now done about three weeks
before the day of publication--one set of plates being sent up
to London by the mail, an impression is printed off by steam: the
London agent has then time to send packages by the cheapest
conveyances to several of the large towns, and other copies go
through the booksellers' parcels to all the smaller towns. Thus a
great saving is effected in the outlay of capital, and 20,000
copies are conveyed from London, as a centre, to all parts of
England, whilst there is no difficulty in completing imperfect
sets, nor any waste from printing more than the public demand.

334. The conveyance of letters is another case, in which the
importance of saving time would allow of great expense in any new
machinery for its accomplishment. There is a natural limit to the
speed of horses, which even the greatest improvements in the
breed, aided by an increased perfection in our roads, can never
surpass; and from which, perhaps, we are at present not very
remote. When we reflect upon the great expense of time and money
which the last refinements of a theory or an art usually require,
it is not unreasonable to suppose that the period has arrived in
which the substitution of machinery for such purposes ought to be
tried.

335. The post bag despatched every evening by the mail to one
of our largest cities, Bristol, usually weighs less than a
hundred pounds. Now, the first reflection which naturally
presents itself is, that, in order to transport these letters a
hundred and twenty miles, a coach and apparatus, weighing above
thirty hundredweight, are put in motion, and also conveyed over
the same space. (2*)

It is obvious that, amongst the conditions of machinery for
accomplishing such an object, it would be desirable to reduce the
weight of matter to be conveyed along with the letters: it would
also be desirable to reduce the velocity of the animal power
employed; because the faster a horse is driven, the less weight
he can draw. Amongst the variety of contrivances which might be
imagined for this purpose, we will mention one, which, although
by no means free from objections, fulfils some of the prescribed
conditions; and it is not a purely theoretical speculation, since
some few experiments have been made upon it, though on an
extremely limited scale.

336. Let us imagine a series of high pillars erected at
frequent intervals, perhaps every hundred feet, and as nearly as
possible in a straight line between two post towns. An iron or
steel wire must be stretched over proper supports, fixed on each
of these pillars, and terminating at the end of every three or
five miles, as may be found expedient, in a very strong support,
by which it may be stretched. At each of these latter points a
man ought to reside in a small stationhouse. A narrow cylindrical
tin case, to contain the letters, might be suspended by two
wheels rolling upon this wire; the cases being so constructed as
to enable the wheels to pass unimpeded by the fixed supports of
the wire. An endless wire of much smaller size must pass over two
drums, one at each end of the station. This wire should be
supported on rollers, fixed to the supports of the great wire,
and at a short distance below it. There would thus be two
branches of the smaller wire always accompanying the larger one;
and the attendant at either station, by turning the drum, might
cause them to move with great velocity in opposite directions. In
order to convey the cylinder which contains the letters, it would
only be necessary to attach it by a string, or by a catch, to
either of the branches of the endless wire. Thus it would be
conveyed speedily to the next station, where it would be removed
by the attendant to the commencement of the next wire, and so
forwarded. It is unnecessary to enter into the details which
this, or any similar plan, would require. The difficulties are
obvious; but if these could be overcome, it would present many
advantages besides velocity; for if an attendant resided at each
station, the additional expense of having two or three deliveries
of letters every day, and even of sending expresses at any
moment, would be comparatively trifling; nor is it impossible
that the stretched wire might itself be available for a species
of telegraphic communication yet more rapid.

Perhaps if the steeples of churches, properly selected, were
made use of, connecting them by a few intermediate stations with
some great central building, as, for instance, with the top of St
Paul's; and if a similar apparatus were placed on the top of each
steeple, with a man to work it during the day, it might be
possible to diminish the expense of the two-penny post, and make
deliveries every half hour over the greater part of the
metropolis.

337. The power of steam, however, bids fair almost to rival
the velocity of these contrivances; and the fitness of its
application to the purposes of conveyance, particularly where
great rapidity is required, begins now to be generally admitted.
The following extract from the Report of the Committee of the
House of Commons on steamcarriages, explains clearly its various
advantages:

Perhaps one of the principal advantages resulting from the use of
steam, will be, that it may be employed as cheaply at a quick as
at a slow rate; 'this is one of the advantages over horse labour.
which becomes more and more expensive as the speed is increased.
There is every reason to expect, that in the end the rate of
travelling by steam will be much quicker than the utmost speed of
travelling by horses; in short, the safety to travellers will
become the limit to speed.' In horse-draught the opposite result
takes place; 'in all cases horses lose power of draught in a much
greater proportion than they gain speed, and hence the work they
do becomes more expensive as they go quicker.'

Without increase of cost, then, we shall obtain a power which
will insure a rapidity of internal communication far beyond the
utmost speed of horses in draught; and although the performance
of these carriages may not have hitherto attained this point,
when once it has been established, that at equal speed we can use
steam more cheaply in draught than horses, we may fairly
anticipate that every day's increased experience in the
management of the engines, will induce greater skill, greater
confidence, and greater speed.

The cheapness of the conveyance will probably be, for some
time, a secondary consideration. If, at present, it can be used
as cheaply as horse power, the competition with the former modes
of conveyance will first take place as to speed. When once the
superiority of steam-carriages shall have been fully established,
competition will induce economy in the cost of working them. The
evidence, however, of Mr Macneill, shewing the greater
efficiency, with diminished expenditure of fuel, by locomotive
engines on railways, convinces the committee, that experience
will soon teach a better construction of the engines, and a less
costly mode of generating the requisite supply of steam.

Nor are the advantages of steam-power confined to the greater
velocity attained, or to its greater cheapness than
horse-draught. In the latter, danger is increased, in as large a
proportion as expense, by greater speed. In steam-power, on the
contrary, 'there is no danger of being run away with, and that of
being overturned is greatly diminished. It is difficult to
control four such horses as can draw a heavy carriage ten miles
per hour, in case they are frightened, or choose to run away; and
for quick travelling they must be kept in that state of courage,
that they are always inclined for running away, particularly down
hills, and at sharp turns of the road. In steam, however, there
is little corresponding danger, being perfectly controllable, and
capable of exerting its power in reverse in going down hills.,
Every witness examined has given the fullest and most
satisfactory evidence of the perfect control which the conductor
has over the movement of the carriage. With the slightest
exertion it can be stopped or turned, under circumstances where
horses would be totally unmanageable.

338. Another instance may be mentioned in which the object to
be obtained is so important, that although it might be rarely
wanted, yet machinery for that purpose would justify considerable
expense. A vessel to contain men, and to be navigated at some
distance below the surface of the sea, would, in many
circumstances, be almost invaluable. Such a vessel, evidently,
could not be propelled by any engine requiring the aid of fire.
If, however, by condensing air into a liquid, and carrying it in
that state, a propelling power could be procured sufficient for
moving the vessel through a considerable space, the expense would
scarcely render its occasional employment impossible.(3*)

339. Slide of Alpnach. Amongst the forests which flank many
of the lofty mountains of Switzerland, some of the finest timber
is found in positions almost inaccessible. The expense of roads,
even if it were possible to make them in such situations, would
prevent the inhabitants from deriving any advantages from these
almost inexhaustible supplies. Placed by nature at a considerable
elevation above the spot at which they can be made use of, they
are precisely in fit circumstances for the application of
machinery to their removal; and the inhabitants avail themselves
of the force of gravity to relieve them from some portion of this
labour. The inclined planes which they have established in
various forests, by which the timber has been sent down to the
water courses, have excited the admiration of every traveller;
and in addition to the merit of simplicity, the construction
these slides requires scarcely anything beyond the material which
grows upon the spot.

Of all these specimens of carpentry, the Slide of Alpnach was
the most considerable, from its great length, and from the almost
inaccessible position from which it descended. The following
account of it is taken from Gilbert's Annalen, 1819, which is
translated in the second volume of Brewster's Journal:

For many centuries, the rugged flanks and the deep gorges of
Mount Pilatus were covered with impenetrable forests; which were
permitted to grow and to perish, without being of the least
utility to man, till a foreigner, who had been conducted into
their wild recesses in the pursuit of the chamois, directed the
attention of several Swiss gentlemen to the extent and
superiority of the timber. The most skilful individuals, however,
considered it quite impracticable to avail themselves of such
inaccessible stores. It was not till the end of 1816, that M.
Rupp, and three Swiss gentlemen, entertaining more sanguine
hopes, purchased a certain extent of the forests, and began the
construction of the slide, which was completed in the spring of
1818.

The Slide of Alpnach is formed entirely of about 25,000 large
pine trees, deprived of their bark, and united together in a very
ingenious manner, without the aid of iron. It occupied about 160
workmen during eighteen months, and cost nearly 100,000 francs,
or L4,250. It is about three leagues, or 44,000 English feet
long, and terminates in the Lake of Lucerne. It has the form of a
trough, about six feet broad, and from three to six feet deep.
Its bottom is formed of three trees, the middle one of which has
a groove cut out in the direction of its length, for receiving
small rills of water, which are conducted into it from various
places, for the purpose of diminishing the friction. The whole of
the slide is sustained by about 2,000 supports; and in many
places it is attached, in a very ingenious manner, to the rugged
precipices of granite.

The direction of the slide is sometimes straight, and
sometimes zig-zag, with an inclination of from 10 degrees to 18
degrees. It is often carried along the sides of hills and the
flanks of precipitous rocks, and sometimes passes over their
summits. Occasionally it goes under ground, and at other times it
is conducted over the deep gorges by scaffoldings 120 feet in
height.

The boldness which characterizes this work, the sagacity and
skill displayed in all its arrangements, have excited the wonder
of every person who has seen it. Before any step could be taken
in its erection, it was necessary to cut several thousand trees
to obtain a passage through the impenetrable thickets. All these
difficulties, however, were surmounted, and the engineer had at
last the satisfaction of seeing the trees descend from the
mountain with the rapidity of lightning. The larger pines, which
were about a hundred feet long, and ten inches thick at their
smaller extremity, ran through the space of three leagues, or
nearly nine miles, in two minutes and a half, and during their
descent, they appeared to be only a few feet in length.

The arrangements for this part of the operation were
extremely simple. From the lower end of the slide to the upper
end, where the trees were introduced, workmen were posted at
regular distances, and as soon as everything was ready, the
workman at the lower end of the slide cried out to the one above
him, 'Lachez' (let go). The cry was repeated from one to another.
and reached the top of the slide in three minutes. The workmen at
the top of the slide then cried out to the one below him, 'Il
vient' (it comes), and the tree was instantly launched down the
slide, preceded by the cry which was repeated from post to post.
As soon as the tree had reached the bottom, and plunged into the
lake, the cry of lachez was repeated as before, and a new tree
was launched in a similar manner. By these means a tree descended
every five or six minutes, provided no accident happened to the
slide, which sometimes took place, but which was instantly
repaired when it did.

In order to shew the enormous force which the trees acquired
from the great velocity of their descent, M. Rupp made
arrangements for causing some of the trees to spring from the
slide. They penetrated by their thickest extremities no less than
from eighteen to twenty-four feet into the earth; and one of the
trees having by accident struck against another, it instantly
cleft it through its whole length, as if it had been struck by
lightning.

After the trees had descended the slide, they were collected
into rafts upon the lake, and conducted to Lucerne. From thence
they descended the Reuss, then the Aar to near Brugg, afterwards
to Waldshut by the Rhine, then to Basle, and even to the sea when
it was necessary.

It is to be regretted that this magnificent structure no
longer exists, and that scarcely a trace of it is to be seen upon
the flanks of Mount Pilatus. Political circumstances having taken
away the principal source of demand for the timber, and no other
market having been found, the operation of cutting and
transporting the trees necessarily ceased.(4*)

Professor Playfair, who visited this singular work, states,
that six minutes was the usual time occupied in the descent of a
tree; but that in wet weather, it reached the lake in three
minutes.

NOTES:

1. The author of these pages, with one of his friends, was
recently induced to visit this most interesting establishment,
after midnight, during the progress of a very important debate.
The place was illuminated with gas, and was light as the day:
there was neither noise nor bustle; and the visitors were
received with such calm and polite attention, that they did not,
until afterwards, become sensible of the inconvenience which such
intruders, at a moment of the greatest pressure, must occasion,
nor reflect tha the tranquility which they admired, was the
result of intense and regulated occupation. But the effect of
such checks in the current of business will appear on
recollecting that, as four thousand newspapers are printed off on
one side within the hour, every minute is attended with a loss of
sixty-six impressions. The quarter of an hour, therefore, which
the stranger may think it not unreasonable to claim for the
gratification of his curiosity (and to him this time is but a
moment), may cause a failure in the delivery of a thousand
copies, and disappoint a proportionate number of expectant
readers, in some of our distant towns, to which the morning
papers are dispatched by the earliest and most rapid conveyances
of each day.

This note is inserted with the further and more general
purpose of calling the attention of those, especially foreigners,
who are desirous of inspecting our larger manufactories, to the
chief cause of the difficulty which frequently attends their
introduction. When the establishment is very extensive, and its
departments skilfully arranged, the exclusion of visitors arises,
not from any illiberal jealousy, nor, generally, from any desire
of concealment, which would, in most cases, be absurd, but from
the substantial inconvenience and loss of time, throughout an
entire series of well-combined operations, which must be
occasioned even by short and causual interruptions.

2. It is true that the transport of letters is not the only
object which this apparatus answers; but the transport of
passengers, which is a secondary object, does in fact put a limit
to the velocity of that of the letters, which is the primary one.

3. A proposal for such a vessel, and description of its
construction, by the author of this volume, may be found in the
Encyclopaedia Metropolitana, Art. Diving Bell.

4. The mines of Bolanos in Mexico are supplied with timber from
the adjacent mountains by a slide similar to that of Alpnach. It
was constructed by M. Floresi, a gentleman well acquainted with
Switzerland.



Chapter 29

On the Duration of Machinery

340. The time during which a machine will continue to perform
its work effectually, will depend chiefly upon the perfection
with which it was originally constructed upon the care taken to
keep it in proper repair, particularly to correct every shake or
looseness in the axes--and upon the smallness of the mass and of
the velocity of its moving parts. Everything approaching to a
blow, all sudden change of direction, is injurious. Engines for
producing power, such as windmills, water-mills, and
steam-engines, usually last a long time.(1*)

341. Many of the improvements which have taken place in
steamengines, have arisen from an improved construction of the
boiler or the fireplace. The following table of the work done by
steam-engines in Cornwall, whilst it proves the importance of
constantly measuring the effects of machinery, shows also the
gradual advance which has been made in the art of constructing
and managing those engines.

 A table of the duty performed by steam-engines in Cornwall,
shewing the average of the whole for each year, and also the
average duty of the best engine in each monthly report

Years; Approximate number of engines reported; Average duty of
the whole; Average duty of the best engines

 1813; 24; 19,456,000; 26,400,000
 1814; 29; 20.534,232; 32,000,000
 1815; 35; 20.526,160; 28,700,000
 1816; 32; 22,907,110; 32,400,000
 1817; 31; 26,502,259; 41,600,000
 1818; 32; 25,433,783; 39,300,000
 1819; 37; 26,252,620; 40,000,000
 1820; 37; 28,736,398; 41,300,000
 1821; 39; 28,223,382; 42,800,000
 1822; 45; 28,887,216; 42,500.000
 1823; 45; 28,156,162; 42,122,000
 1824; 45; 28,326,140; 43,500,000
 1825; 50; 32,000,741; 45,400,000
 1826; 48; 30,486,630; 45,200,000
 1827; 47; 32,100,000; 59,700,000
 1828; 54; 37,100,000; 76,763,000
 1829; 52; 41,220,000; 76,234,307
 1830; 55; 43,350,000; 75,885,519
 1831; 55(2*); 44,700,000; 74,911,365
 1832; 60; 44,400,000; 79,294,114
 1833; 58; 46,000,000; 83,306,092


342. The advantage arising from registering the duty done by
steamengines in Cornwall has been so great that the proprietors
of one of the largest mines, on which there are several engines,
find it good economy to employ a man to measure the duty they
perform every day. This daily report is fixed up at a particular
hour, and the enginemen are always in waiting, anxious to know
the state of their engines. As the general reports are made
monthly, if accident should cause a partial stoppage in the flue
of any of the boilers, it might without this daily check continue
two or three weeks before it could be discovered by a falling off
of the duty of the engine. In several of the mines a certain
amount of duty is assigned to each engine; and if it does more,
the proprietors give a premium to the engineers according to its
amount. This is called million money, and is a great stimulus to
economy in working the engine.

343. Machinery for producing any commodity in great demand,
seldom actually wears out; new improvements, by which the same
operations can be executed either more quickly or better,
generally superseding it long before that period arrives: indeed,
to make such an improved machine profitable, it is usually
reckoned that in five years it ought to have paid itself, and in
ten to be superseded by a better.

'A cotton manufacturer,' says one of the witnesses before a
Committee of the House of Commons, 'who left Manchester seven
years ago, would be driven out of the market by the men who are
now living in it, provided his knowledge had not kept pace with
those who have been, during that time, constantly profiting by
the progressive improvements that have taken place in that
period.'

344. The effect of improvements in machinery, seems
incidentally to increase production, through a cause which may be
thus explained. A manufacturer making the usual profit upon his
capital, invested in looms or other machines in perfect
condition, the market price of making each of which is a hundred
pounds, invents some improvement. But this is of such a nature,
that it cannot be adapted to his present engines. He finds upon
calculation, that at the rate at which he can dispose of his
manufactured produce, each new engine would repay the cost of its
making, together with the ordinary profit of capital, in three
years: he also concludes from his experience of the trade, that
the improvement he is about to make, will not be generally
adopted by other manufacturers before that time. On these
considerations, it is clearly his interest to sell his present
engines, even at half-price, and construct new ones on the
improved principle. But the purchaser who gives only fifty pounds
for the old engines, has not so large a fixed capital invested in
his factory, as the person from whom he purchased them; and as he
produces the same quantity of the manufactured article, his
profits will be larger. Hence, the price of the commodity will
fall, not only in consequence of the cheaper production by the
new machines, but also by the more profitable working of the old,
thus purchased at a reduced price. This change, however, can be
only transient; for a time will arrive when the old machinery,
although in good repair, must become worthless. The improvement
which took place not long ago in frames for making patent-net was
so great, that a machine, in good repair, which had cost L1200,
sold a few years after for L60. During the great speculations in
that trade, the improvements succeeded each other so rapidly,
that machines which had never been finished were abandoned in the
hands of their makers, because new improvements had superseded
their utility.

345. The durability of watches, when well made, is very
remarkable. One was produced, in going order, before a committee
of the House of Commons to enquire into the watch trade, which
was made in the year 1660; and there are many of ancient date, in
the possession of the Clockmaker's Company, which are still
actually kept going. The number of watches manufactured for home
consumption was, in the year 1798, about 50,000 annually. If this
supply was for Great Britain only, it was consumed by about ten
and a half millions of persons.

346. Machines are, in some trades, let out to hire, and a
certain sum is paid for their use; in the manner of rent. This is
the case amongst the framework knitters: and Mr Henson, in
speaking of the rate of payment for the use of their frames,
states, that the proprietor receives such a rent that, besides
paying the full interest for his capital, he clears the value of
his frame in nine years. When the rapidity with which
improvements succeed each other is considered, this rent does not
appear exorbitant. Some of these frames have been worked for
thirteen years with little or no repair. But circumstances
occasionally arise which throw them out of employment, either
temporarily or permanently. Some years since, an article was
introduced called cut-up work, by which the price of
stocking-frames was greatly deteriorated. From the evidence of Mr
J. Rawson, it appears that, in consequence of this change in the
nature of the work, each frame could do the work of two, and many
stocking frames were thrown out of employment, and their value
reduced full three-fourths.(3*)

This information is of great importance, if the numbers here
given are nearly correct, and if no other causes intervened to
diminish the price of frames; for it shews the numerical
connection between the increased production of those machines and
their diminished value.

347. The great importance of simplifying all transactions
between masters and workmen, and of dispassionately discussing
with the latter the influence of any proposed regulations
connected with their trade, is well examplified by a mistake into
which both parties unintentionally fell, and which was productive
of very great misery in the lace trade. Its history is so well
told by William Allen, a framework knitter, who was a party to
it, that an extract from his evidence, as given before the
Framework Knitters' Committee of 1812, will best explain it.

"I beg to say a few words respecting the frame rent; the rent
paid for lace frames, until the year 1805, was 1s. 6d. a frame
per week; there then was not any very great inducement for
persons to buy frames and let them out by the hire, who did not
belong to the trade; at that time an attempt was made, by one or
two houses, to reduce the prices paid to the workmen, in
consequence of a dispute between these two houses and another
great house: some little difference being paid in the price
amongst the respective houses, I was one chosen by the workmen to
try if we could not remedy the impending evil: we consulted the
respective parties, and found them inflexible; these two houses
that were about to reduce the prices, said that they would either
immediately reduce the price of making net, or they would
increase the frame rent: the difference to the workmen was
considerable, between the one and the other; they would suffer
less, in the immediate operation of the thing, by having the rent
advanced, than the price of making net reduced. They chose at
that time, as they thought, the lesser evil, but it has turned
out to be otherwise; for, immediately as the rent was raised upon
the percentage laid out in frames, it induced almost every
person, who had got a little money, to lay it out in the purchase
of frames; these frames were placed in the hands of men who could
get work for them at the warehouses; they were generally
constrained to pay an enormous rent, and then they were
compelled, most likely, to buy of the persons that let them the
frames, their butcher's meat, their grocery, or their clothing:
the encumbrance of these frames became entailed upon them: if any
deadness took place in the work they must take it at a very
reduced price, for fear of the consequences that would fall upon
them from the person who bought the frame: thus the evil has been
daily increasing, till, in conjunction with the other evils crept
into the trade, they have almost crushed it to atoms."

348. The evil of not assigning fairly to each tool, or each
article produced, its proportionate value, or even of not having
a perfectly distinct, simple, and definite agreement between a
master and his workmen, is very considerable. Workmen find it
difficult in such cases to know the probable produce of their
labour; and both parties are often led to adopt arrangements,
which, had they been well examined, would have been rejected as
equally at variance in the results with the true interests of
both.

349. At Birmingham, stamps and dies, and presses for a great
variety of articles, are let out: they are generally made by men
possessing small capital, and are rented by workmen. Power also
is rented at the same place. Steam-engines are erected in large
buildings containing a variety of rooms, in which each person may
hire one, two, or any other amount of horsepower, as his
occupation may require. If any mode could be discovered of
transmitting power, without much loss from friction, to
considerable distances, and at the same time of registering the
quantity made use of at any particular point, a considerable
change would probably take place in many departments of the
present system of manufacturing. A few central engines to produce
power, might then be erected in our great towns, and each
workman, hiring a quantity of power sufficient for his purpose,
might have it conveyed into his own house; and thus a transition
might in some instances be effected, if it should be found more
profitable, back again from the system of great factories to that
of domestic manufacture.

350. The transmission of water through a series of pipes,
might be employed for the distribution of power, but the friction
would consume a considerable portion. Another method has been
employed in some instances, and is practised at the Mint. It
consists in exhausting the air from a large vessel by means of a
steam-engine. This vessel is connected by pipes, with a small
piston which drives each coining press; and, on opening a valve,
the pressure of the external air forces in the piston. This air
is then admitted to the general reservoir, and pumped out by the
engine. The condensation of air might be employed for the same
purpose; but there are some unexplained facts relating to elastic
fluids, which require further observations and experiment before
they can be used for the conveyance of power to any considerable
distance. It has been found, for instance, in attempting to blow
a furnace by means of a powerful water-wheel driving air through
a cast-iron pipe of above a mile in length, that scarcely any
sensible effect was produced at the opposite extremity. In one
instance, some accidental obstruction being suspected, a cat put
in at one end found its way out without injury at the other, thus
proving that the phenomenon did not depend on interruption within
the pipe.

351. The most portable form in which power can be condensed
is, perhaps, by the liquefaction of the gases. It is known that,
under considerable pressure, several of these become liquid at
ordinary temperatures; carbonic acid, for example, is reduced to
a liquid state by a pressure of sixty atmospheres. One of the
advantages attending the use of these fluids, would be that the
pressure exerted by them would remain constant until the last
drop of liquid had assumed the form of gas. If either of the
elements of common air should be found to be capable of reduction
to a liquid state before it unites into a corrosive fluid with
the other ingredient, then we shall possess a ready means of
conveying power in any quantity and to any distance. Hydrogen
probably will require the strongest compressing force to render
it liquid, and may, therefore, possibly be applied where still
greater condensation of power is wanted. In all these cases the
condensed gases may be looked upon as springs of enormous force,
which have been wound up by the exertion of power, and which will
deliver the whole of it back again when required. These springs
of nature differ in some respects from the steel springs formed
by our art; for in the compression of the natural springs a vast
quantity of latent heat is forced out, and in their return to the
state of gas an equal quantity is absorbed. May not this very
property be employed with advantage in their application?

Part of the mechanical difficulty to be overcome in
constructing apparatus connected with liquefied gases, will
consist in the structure of the valves and packing necessary to
retain the fluids under the great pressure to which they must be
submitted. The effect of heat on these gases has not yet been
sufficiently tried, to lead us to any very precise notions of the
additional power which its application to them will supply.

The elasticity of air is sometimes employed as a spring,
instead of steel: in one of the large printing-machines in London
the momentum of a considerable mass of matter is destroyed by
making it condense the air included in a cylinder, by means of a
piston against which it impinges.

352. The effect of competition in cheapening articles of
manufacture sometimes operates in rendering them less durable.
When such articles are conveyed to a distance for consumption, if
they are broken, it often happens, from the price of labour being
higher where they are used than where they were made, that it is
more expensive to mend the old article, than to purchase a new.
Such is usually the case, in great cities, with some of the
commoner locks, with hinges, and with a variety of articles of
hardware.

NOTES:

1. The amount of obstructions arising from the casual fixing of
trees in the bottom of the river, may be estimated from the
proportion of steamboats destroyed by running upon them, The
subjoined statement is taken from the American Almanack for 1832:


'Between the years 1811 and 1831, three hundred and
forty-eight steamboats were built on the Mississippi and its
tributary streams During that period a hundred and fifty were
lost or worn out,
'Of this hundred and fifty:
            worn out            63
            lost by snags       36
            burnt               14
            lost by collision    3
            by accidents
                not ascertained 34
Thirty-six, or nearly one fourth, being destroyed by accidental
obstructions.

Snag is the name given in America to trees which stand nearly
upright in the stream, with their roots fixed at the bottom.

It is usual to divide off at the bow of the steamboats a
watertight chamber, in order that when a hole is made in it by
running against the snags, the water may not enter the rest of
the vessel and sink it instantly.

2. This passage is not printed in italics in the original, but it
has been thus marked in the above extract, from its importance,
and from the conviction that the most extended discussion will
afford additional evidence of its truth.

3. Report from the Committee of the House of Commons on the
Framework Knitter's Petition, April, 1819.



Chapter 30

On Combinations Amongst Masters or Workmen against Each Other

353. There exist amongst the workmen of almost all classes,
certain rules or laws which govern their actions towards each
other, and towards their employers. But, besides these general
principles, there are frequently others peculiar to each factory,
which have derived their origin, in many instances, from the
mutual convenience of the parties engaged in them. Such rules are
little known except to those actually pursuing the several
trades; and, as it is of importance that their advantages and
disadvantages should be canvassed, we shall offer a few remarks
upon some of them.

354. The principles by which such laws should be tried are,

First. That they conduce to the general benefit of all the
persons employed.

Secondly. That they prevent fraud.

Thirdly. That they interfere as little as possible with the
free agency of each individual.

355. It is usual in many workshops, that, on the first
entrance of a new journeyman, he shall pay a small fine to the
rest of the men. It is clearly unjust to insist upon this
payment; and when it is spent in drinking, which is,
unfortunately, too often the case, it is injurious. The reason
assigned for the demand is, that the newcomer will require some
instruction in the habits of the shop, and in the places of the
different tools, and will thus waste the time of some of his
companions until he is instructed. If this fine were added to a
fund, managed by the workmen themselves, and either divided at
given periods, or reserved for their relief in sickness, it would
be less objectionable, since its tendency would be to check the
too frequent change of men from one shop to another. But it
ought, at all events, not to be compulsory, and the advantages to
be derived from the fund to which the workman is invited to
subscribe, ought to be his sole inducement to contribute.

356. In many workshops, the workmen, although employed on
totally different parts of the objects manufactured, are yet
dependent, in some measure, upon each other. Thus a single smith
may be able to forge, in one day, work enough to keep four or
five turners employed during the next. If, from idleness or
intemperance, the smith neglects his work, and does not furnish
the usual supply, the turners (supposing them to be paid by the
piece), will have their time partly unoccupied, and their gains
consequently diminished. It is reasonable, in such circumstances,
that a fine should be levied on the delinquent; but it is
desirable that the master should have concurred with his workmen
in establishing such a rule, and that it should be shown to each
individual previously to his engagement; and it is very desirable
that such fine should not be spent in drinking.

357. In some establishments, it is customary for the master
to give a small gratuity whenever any workman has exercised a
remarkable degree of skill, or has economized the material
employed. Thus, in splitting horn into layers for lanterns, one
horn usually furnishes from five to eight layers; but if a
workman split the horn into ten layers or more, he receives a
pint of ale from the master. These premiums should not be too
high, lest the material should be wasted in unsuccessful
attempts: but such regulations, when judiciously made, are
beneficial, as they tend to produce skill amongst the workmen,
profit to the masters, and diminished cost to the consumers.

358. In some few factories, in which the men are paid by the
piece, it is usual, when any portion of work, delivered in by a
workman, is rejected by the master on account of its being badly
executed, to fine the delinquent. Such a practice tends to remedy
one of the evils attendant upon that mode of payment, and greatly
assists the master, since his own judgement is thus supported by
competent and unprejudiced judges.

359. Societies exist amongst some of the larger bodies of
workmen, and others have been formed by the masters engaged in
the same branches of trade. These associations have different
objects in view; but it is very desirable that their effects
should be well understood by the individuals who compose them;
and that the advantages arising from them, which are certainly
great, should be separated as much as possible from the evils
which they have, unfortunately, too frequently introduced.
Associations of workmen and of masters may, with advantage, agree
upon rules to be observed by both parties, in estimating the
proportionate value of different kinds of work executed in their
trade, in order that time may be saved, and disputes be
prevented. They may also be most usefully employed in acquiring
accurate information as to the number of persons working in the
various departments of any manufacture, their rate of wages, the
number of machines in use, and other statistical details.
Information of this nature is highly valuable, both for the
guidance of the parties who are themselves most interested, and
to enable them, upon any application to government for
assistance, or with a view to legislative enactments, to supply
those details, without which the propriety of any proposed
measure cannot be duly estimated. Such details may be collected
by men actually engaged in any branch of trade, at a much smaller
expense of time, than by persons less acquainted with, and less
interested in it.

360. One of the most legitimate and most important objects of
such associations as we have just mentioned, is to agree upon
ready and certain modes of measuring the quantity of work done by
the workmen. For a long time a difficulty upon this point existed
in the lace trade, which was justly complained of by the men as a
serious grievance; but the introduction of the rack, which counts
the number of holes in the length of the piece, has entirely put
an end to the most fertile cause of disputes. This invention was
adverted to by the Committee of 1812, and a hope was expressed,
in their report, that the same contrivance would be applied to
stocking-frames. It would, indeed, be of great mutual advantage
to the industrious workman, and to the master manufacturer in
every trade, if the machines employed in it could register the
quantity of work which they perform, in the same manner as a
steam-engine does the number of strokes it makes. The
introduction of such contrivances gives a greater stimulus to
honest industry than can readily be imagined, and removes one of
the sources of disagreement between parties, whose real interests
must always suffer by any estrangement between them.

361. The effects arising from combinations amongst the
workmen, are almost always injurious to the parties themselves.
There are numerous instances, in which the public suffer by
increased price at the moment, but are ultimately gainers from
the permanent reduction which results; whilst, on the other hand,
the improvements which are often made in machinery in consequence
of 'a strike' amongst the workmen, most frequently do injury, of
greater or less duration, to that particular class which gave
rise to them. As the injury to the men and to their families is
almost always more serious than that which affects their
employers, it is of the utmost importance to the comfort and
happiness of the former class, that they should themselves
entertain sound views upon this question. For this purpose a few
illustrations of the principle which is here maintained, will
probably have greater weight than any reasoning of a more general
nature, though drawn from admitted principles of political
economy. Such instances will, moreover, present the advantage of
appealing to facts known to many individuals of those classes for
whose benefit these reflections are intended.

362. There is a process in the manufacture of gun barrels for
making what, in the language of the trade, are called skelps. The
skelp is a piece or bar of iron, about three feet long, and four
inches wide, but thicker and broader at one end than at the
other; and the barrel of a musket is formed by forging out such
pieces to the proper dimensions, and then folding or bending them
into a cylindrical form, until the edges overlap, so that they
can be welded together.

About twenty years ago, the workmen, employed at a very
extensive factory in forging these skelps out of bar-iron,
'struck' for an advance of wages; and as their demands were very
exorbitant, they were not immediately complied with. In the
meantime, the superintendent of the establishment directed his
attention to the subject; and it occurred to him, that if the
circumference of the rollers, between which the bar-iron was
rolled, were to be made equal to the length of a skelp, or of a
musket barrel, and if also the groove in which the iron was
compressed, instead of being of the same width and depth
throughout, were cut gradually deeper and wider from a point on
the rollers, until it returned to the same point, then the
bar-iron passing between such rollers, instead of being uniform
in width and thickness, would have the form of a skelp. On making
the trial, it was found to succeed perfectly; a great reduction
of human labour was effected by the process, and the workmen who
had acquired peculiar skill in performing it ceased to derive any
advantage from their dexterity.

363. It is somewhat singular that another and a still more
remarkable instance of the effect of combination amongst workmen,
should have occurred but a few years since in the very same
trade. The process of welding the skelps, so as to convert them
into gun barrels, required much skill, and after the termination
of the war, the demand for muskets having greatly diminished, the
number of persons employed in making them was very much reduced.
This circumstance rendered combination more easy; and upon one
occasion, when a contract had been entered into for a
considerable supply to be delivered on a fixed day, the men all
struck for such an advance of wages as would have caused the
completion of the contract to be attended with a very heavy loss.

In this difficulty, the contractors resorted to a mode of
welding the gun barrel, for which a patent had been taken out by
one of themselves some years before this event. The plan had not
then succeeded so well as to come into general use, in
consequence of the cheapness of the usual mode of welding by hand
labour, combined with some other difficulties with which the
patentee had to contend. But the stimulus produced by the
combination of the workmen, induced him to make new trials, and
he was enabled to introduce such a facility in welding gun
barrels by rollers, and such perfection in the work itself, that,
in all probability, very few will in future be welded by hand
labour.

This new process consisted in folding a bar of iron, about a
foot long, into the form of a cylinder, with the edges a little
overlapping. It was then placed in a furnace, and being taken out
when raised to a welding heat, a triblet, or cylinder of iron,
was placed in it, and the whole was passed quickly through a pair
of rollers. The effect of this was, that the welding was
performed at a single heating, and the remainder of the
elongation necessary for extending the skelps to the length of
the musket barrel, was performed in a similar manner, but at a
lower temperature. The workmen who had combined were, of course,
no longer wanted, and instead of benefiting themselves by their
combination, they were reduced permanently, by this improvement
in the art, to a considerably lower rate of wages: for as the
process of welding gun barrels by hand required peculiar skill
and considerable experience, they had hitherto been in the habit
of earning much higher wages than other workmen of their class.
On the other hand, the new method of welding was far less
injurious to the texture of the iron, which was now exposed only
once, instead of three or four times, to the welding heat, so
that the public derived advantage from the superiority, as well
as from the economy of the process. Another process has
subsequently been invented, applicable to the manufacture of a
lighter kind of iron tubes, which can thus be made at a price
which renders their employment very general. They are now to be
found in the shops of all our larger ironmongers, of various
lengths and diameters, with screws cut at each end; and are in
constant use for the conveyance of gas for lighting, or of water
for warming, our houses.

364. Similar examples must have presented themselves to all
those who are familiar with the details of our
manufactories, but these are sufficient to illustrate one of
the results of combinations. It would not, however, be fair
to push the conclusion deduced from these instances to its
extreme limit. Although it is very apparent, that in the two
cases which have been stated, the effects of combination
were permanently injurious to the workman, by almost
immediately placing him in a lower class (with respect to
his wages) than he occupied before; yet they do not prove
that all such combinations have this effect. It is quite
evident that they have all this tendency, it is also certain
that considerable stimulus must be applied to induce a man
to contrive a new and expensive process; and that in both
these cases, unless the fear of pecuniary loss had acted
powerfully, the improvement would not have been made. If,
therefore, the workmen had in either case combined for only
a small advance of wages, they would, in all probability,
have been successful, and the public would have been
deprived, for many years, of the inventions to which these
combinations gave rise. It must, however, be observed, that
the same skill which enabled the men to obtain, after long
practice, higher wages than the rest of their class, would
prevent many of them from being permanently thrown back into
the class of ordinary workmen. Their diminished wages will
continue only until they have acquired, by practice, a
facility of execution in some other of the more difficult
operations: but a diminution of wages, even for a year or
two, is still a very serious inconvenience to any person who
lives by his daily exertion. The consequence of combination
has then, in these instances, been, to the workmen who
combined--reduction of wages; to the public -reduction of
price; and to the manufacturer increased sale of his
commodity, resulting from that reduction.

365. It is, however, important to consider the effects of
combination in another and less obvious point of view. The fear
of combination amongst the men whom he employs, will have a
tendency to induce the manufacturer to conceal from his workmen
the extent of the orders he may at any time have received; and,
consequently, they will always be less acquainted with the extent
of the demand for their labour than they otherwise might be. This
is injurious to their interests; for instead of foreseeing, by
the gradual falling-off in the orders, the approach of a time
when they must be unemployed, and preparing accordingly, they are
liable to much more sudden changes than those to which they would
otherwise be exposed.

In the evidence given by Mr Galloway, the engineer, he
remarks, that,

"When employers are competent to show their men that their
business is steady and certain, and when men find that they are
likely to have permanent employment, they have always better
habits, and more settled notions, which will make them better
men, and better workmen, and will produce great benefits to all
who are interested in their employment."

366. As the manufacturer, when he makes a contract, has no
security that a combination may not arise amongst the workmen,
which may render that contract a loss instead of a benefit;
besides taking precautions to prevent them from becoming
acquainted with it, he must also add to the price at which he
could otherwise sell the article, some small increase to cover
the risk of such an occurrence. If an establishment consist of
several branches which can only be carried on jointly, as, for
instance, of iron mines, blast furnaces, and a colliery, in which
there are distinct classes of workmen, it becomes necessary to
keep on hand a larger stock of materials than would be required,
if it were certain that no combinations would arise.

Suppose, for instance, the colliers were to 'strike' for an
advance of wages--unless there was a stock of coal above ground,
the furnaces must be stopped, and the miners also would be thrown
out of employ. Now the cost of keeping a stock of iron ore, or of
coals above ground, is just the same as that of keeping in a
drawer, unemployed, its value in money, (except, indeed, that the
coal suffers a small deterioration by exposure to the elements).
The interest of this sum must, therefore, be considered as the
price of an insurance against the risk of combination amongst the
workmen; and it must, so far as it goes, increase the price of
the manufactured article, and, consequently, limit the demand
which would otherwise exist for it. But every circumstance which
tends to limit the demand, is injurious to the workmen; because
the wider the demand, the less it is exposed to fluctuation.

The effect to which we have alluded, is by no means a
theoretical conclusion; the proprietors of one establishment in
the iron trade, within the author's knowledge, think it expedient
always to keep above ground a supply of coal for six months,
which is, in that instance, equal in value to about L10,000. When
we reflect that the quantity of capital throughout the country
thus kept unemployed merely from the fear of combinations amongst
the workmen, might, under other circumstances, be used for
keeping a larger number at work, the importance of introducing a
system in which there should exist no inducement to combine
becomes additionally evident.

367. That combinations are, while they last, productive of
serious inconveniences to the workmen themselves, is admitted by
all parties; and it is equally true, that, in most cases, a
successful result does not leave them in so good a condition as
they were in before 'the strike'. The little capital they
possessed, which ought to have been hoarded with care for days of
illness or distress, is exhausted; and frequently, in order to
gratify a pride, at the existence of which we cannot but rejoice,
even whilst we regret its misdirected energy, they will undergo
the severest privations rather than return to work at their
former wages. With many of the workmen, unfortunately, during
such periods, bad habits are formed which it is very difficult to
eradicate; and, in all those engaged in such transactions, the
kinder feelings of the heart are chilled, and passions are called
into action which are permanently injurious to the happiness of
the individual, and destructive of those sentiments of confidence
which it is equally the interest of the master manufacturer and
of his workman to maintain. If any of the trade refuse to join in
the strike, the majority too frequently forget, in the excitement
of their feelings, the dictates of justice, and endeavour to
exert a species of tyranny, which can never be permitted to exist
in a free country. In conceding therefore to the working classes,
that they have a right, if they consider it expedient, to combine
for the purpose of procuring higher wages (provided always, that
they have completed all their existing contracts), it ought ever
to be kept before their attention, that the same freedom which
they claim for themselves they are bound to allow to others, who
may have different views of the advantages of combination. Every
effort which reason and kindness can dictate, should be made, not
merely to remove their grievances, but to satisfy their own
reason and feelings, and to show them the consequences which will
probably result from their conduct: but the strong arm of the
law, backed, as in such cases it will always be, by public
opinion, should be instantly and unhesitatingly applied, to
prevent them from violating the liberty of a portion of their
own, or of any other class of society.

368. Amongst the evils which ultimately fall heavy on the
working classes themselves, when, through mistaken views, they
attempt to interfere with their employers in the mode of carrying
on their business, may be mentioned the removal of factories to
other situations, where the proprietors may be free from the
improper control of their men. The removal of a considerable
number of lace frames to the western counties, which took place,
in consequence of the combinations in Nottinghamshire, has
already been mentioned. Other instances have occurred, where
still greater injury has been produced by the removal of a
portion of the skill and capital of the country to a foreign
land. Such was the case at Glasgow, as stated in the fifth
Parliamentary Report respecting Artizans and Machinery. One of
the partners in an extensive cotton factory, disgusted by the
unprincipled conduct of the workmen, removed to the state of New
York, where he re-established his machinery, and thus afforded,
to rivals already formidable to our trade, at once a pattern of
our best machinery, and an example of the most economical methods
of employing it.

369. When the nature of the work is such that it is not
possible to remove it, as happens with regard to mines, the
proprietors are more exposed to injury from combinations amongst
the workmen: but as the owners are generally possessed of a
larger capital, they generally succeed, if the reduction of wages
which they propose is really founded on the necessity of the
case.

An extensive combination lately existed amongst the colliers
in the north of England, which unfortunately led, in several
instances, to acts of violence. The proprietors of the coalmines
were consequently obliged to procure the aid of miners from other
parts of England who were willing to work at the wages they could
afford to give; and the aid of the civil, and in some cases of
the military, power, was requisite for their protection. This
course was persisted in during several months, and the question
being, which party could support itself longest on the diminished
gains, as it might have readily been foreseen, the proprietors
ultimately succeeded.

370. One of the remedies employed by the masters against the
occurrence of combinations, is to make engagements with their men
for long periods and to arrange them in such a manner, that these
contracts shall not all terminate together. This has been done in
some cases at Sheffield, and in other places. It is attended with
the inconvenience to the masters that, during periods when the
demand for their produce is reduced, they are still obliged to
employ the same number of workmen. This circumstance, however,
frequently obliges the proprietors to direct their attention to
improvements in their works: and in one such instance, within the
author's knowledge, a large reservoir was deepened, thus
affording a more constant supply to the water-wheel, whilst, at
the same time, the mud from the bottom gave permanent fertility
to a piece of land previously almost barren. In this case, not
merely was the supply of produce checked, when a glut existed.
but the labour was, in fact, applied more profitably than it
would have been in the usual course.

371. A mode of paying the wages of workmen in articles which
they consume, has been introduced into some of our manufacturing
districts, which has been called the truck system. As in many
instances this has nearly the effect of a combination of the
masters against the men, it is a fit subject for discussion in
the present chapter: but it should be carefully distinguished
from another system of a very different tendency, which will be
first described.

372. The principal necessaries for the support of a workman
and his family are few in number, and are usually purchased by
him in small quantities weekly. Upon such quantities, sold by the
retail dealer, a large profit is generally made; and if the
article is one whose quality, like that of tea, is not readily
estimated, then a great additional gain is made by the retail
dealer selling an inferior article.

Where the number of workmen living on the same spot is large,
it may be thought desirable that they should unite together and
have an agent, to purchase by wholesale those articles which are
most in demand, as tea, suger, bacon, etc., and to retail them at
prices, which will just repay the wholesale cost, together with
the expense of the agent who conducts their sale. If this be
managed wholly by a committee of workmen, aided perhaps by advice
from the master, and if the agent is paid in such a manner as to
have himself an interest in procuring good and reasonable
articles, it may be a benefit to the workmen: and if the plan
succeed in reducing the cost of articles of necessity to the men,
it is clearly the interest of the master to encourage it. The
master may indeed be enabled to afford them facilities in making
their wholesale purchases; but he ought never to have the least
interest in, or any connection with, the profit made by the
articles sold. The men, on the other hand, who subscribe to set
up the shop, ought not, in the slightest degree, to be compelled
to make their purchases there: the goodness and cheapness of the
article ought to be their sole inducements.

It may perhaps be objected, that this plan is only employing
a portion of the capital belonging to the workmen in a retail
trade; and that, without it, competition amongst small
shopkeepers will reduce the articles to nearly the same price.
This objection would be valid if the objects of consumption
required no verification; but combining what has been already
stated on that subject(1*) with the present argument, the plan
seems liable to no serious objections.

373. The truck system is entirely different in its effects.
The master manufacturer keeps a retail shop for articles required
by his men, and either pays their wages in goods, or compels them
by express agreement, or less directly, by unfair means, to
expend the whole or a certain part of their wages at his shop. If
the manufacturer kept this shop merely for the purpose of
securing good articles, at fair prices, to his workmen, and if he
offered no inducement to them to purchase at his shop, except the
superior cheapness of his articles, it would certainly be
advantageous to the men. But, unfortunately, this is not always
the case; and the temptation to the master, in times of
depression, to reduce in effect the wages which he pays (by
increasing the price of articles at his shop), without altering
the nominal rate of payment, is frequently too great to be
withstood. If the object be solely to procure for his workmen
better articles, it will be more effectually accomplished by the
master confining himself to supplying a small capital, at a
moderate rate of interest; leaving the details to be conducted by
a committee of workmen, in conjunction with his own agent, and
the books of the shop to be audited periodically by the men
themselves.

374. Wherever the workmen are paid in goods, or are compelled
to purchase at the master's shop, much injustice is done to them,
and great misery results from it. Whatever may have been the
intentions of the master in such cases, the real effect is, to
deceive the workman as to the amount he receives in exchange for
his labour. Now, the principles on which the happiness of that
class of society depends, are difficult enough to be understood,
even by those who are blessed with far better opportunities of
investigating them: and the importance of their being well
acquainted with those principles which relate to themselves, is
of more vital consequence to workmen, than to many other classes.
It is therefore highly desirable to assist them in comprehending
the position in which they are placed, by rendering all the
relations in which they stand to each other, and to their
employers, as simple as possible. Workmen should be paid entirely
in money; their work should be measured by some unbiassed, some
unerring piece of mechanism; the time during which they are
employed should be defined, and punctually adhered to. The
payments they make to their benefit societies should be fixed on
such just principles, as not to require extraordinary
contributions. In short, the object of all who wish to promote
their happiness should be, to give them, in the simplest form,
the means of knowing beforehand, the sum they are likely to
acquire by their labour, and the money they will be obliged to
expend for their support: thus putting before them, in the
clearest light, the certain result of persevering industry.

375. The cruelty which is inflicted on the workman by the
payment of his wages in goods, is often very severe. The little
purchases necessary for the comfort of his wife and children,
perhaps the medicines he occasionally requires for them in
illness, must all be made through the medium of barter; and he is
obliged to waste his time in arranging an exchange, in which the
goods which he has been compelled to accept for his labour are
invariably taken at a lower price than that at which his master
charged them to him. The father of a family perhaps, writhing
under the agonies of the toothache, is obliged to make his hasty
bargain with the village surgeon, before he will remove the cause
of his pain; or the disconsolate mother is compelled to sacrifice
her depreciated goods in exchange for the last receptacle of her
departed offspring. The subjoined evidence from the Report of the
Committee of the House of Commons on Framework Knitters'
Petitions, shows that these are not exaggerated statements.

It has been so common in our town to pay goods instead of
money, that a number of my neighbours have been obliged to pay
articles for articles, to pay sugar for drugs out of the
druggist's shop; and others have been obliged to pay sugar for
drapery goods, and such things, and exchange in that way numbers
of times. I was credibly informed, that one person paid half a
pound of tenpenny sugar and a penny to have a tooth drawn; and
there is a credible neighbour of mine told me, that he had heard
that the sexton had been paid for digging a grave with sugar and
tea: and before I came off, knowing I had to give evidence upon
these things, I asked this friend to enquire of the sexton,
whether this was a fact: the sexton hesitated for a little time,
on account of bringing into discredit the person who paid these
goods: however, he said at last, 'I have received these articles
repeatedly--I know these things have been paid to a great extent
in this way.'

NOTES:

1. See Chapter XV, p. 87



Chapter 31

On Combinations of Masters against the public

376. A species of combination occasionally takes place
amongst manufacturers against persons having patents: and these
combinations are always injurious to the public, as well as
unjust to the inventors. Some years since, a gentleman invented a
machine, by which modellings and carvings were cut in mahogany,
and other fine woods. The machine resembled, in some measure, the
drilling apparatus employed in ornamental lathes; it produced
beautiful work at a very moderate expense: but the cabinetmakers
met together, and combined against it, and the patent has
consequently never been worked. A similar fate awaited a machine
for cutting veneers by means of a species of knife. In this
instance, the wood could be cut thinner than by the circular saw,
and no waste was incurred; but 'the trade' set themselves against
it, and after a heavy expense, it was given up.

The excuse alleged for this kind of combination, was the fear
entertained by the cabinetmakers that when the public became
acquainted with the article, the patentee would raise the price.

Similar examples of combination seem not to be unfrequent, as
appears by the Report of the Committee of the House of Commons on
Patents for Inventions, June, 1829. See the evidence of Mr
Holdsworth.

377. There occurs another kind of combination against the
public, with which it is difficult to deal. It usually ends in a
monopoly, and the public are then left to the discretion of the
monopolists not to charge them above the growling point--that
is, not to make them pay so much as to induce them actually to
combine against the imposition. This occurs when two companies
supply water or gas to consumers by means of pipes laid down
under the pavement in the street of cities: it may possibly occur
also in docks, canals, railroads, etc., and in other cases where
the capital required is very large, and the competition very
limited. If water or gas companies combine, the public
immediately loses all the advantage of competition, and it has
generally happened, that at the end of a period during which they
have undersold each other, the several companies have agreed to
divide the whole district supplied, into two or more parts, each
company then removing its pipes from all the streets except those
in its own portion. This removal causes great injury to the
pavement, and when the pressure of increased rates induces a new
company to start, the same inconvenience is again produced.
Perhaps one remedy against evils of this kind might be, when a
charter is granted to such companies, to restrict, to a certain
amount, the rate of profit on the shares, and to direct that any
profits beyond, shall accumulate for the repayment of the
original capital. This has been done in several late Acts of
Parliament establishing companies. The maximum rate of profit
allowed ought to be liberal, to compensate for the risk; the
public ought to have auditors on their part, and the accounts
should be annually published, for the purpose of preventing the
limitations from being exceeded. It must however be admitted,
that this would be an interference with capital, which, if
allowed, should, in the present state of our knowledge, be.
examined with great circumspection in each individual case, until
some general principle is established on well-admitted grounds.

378. An instrument called a gas-meter, which ascertains the
quantity of gas used by each consumer, has been introduced, and
furnishes a satisfactory mode of determining the payments to be
made by individuals to the gas companies. A contrivance somewhat
similar in its nature, might be used for the sale of water; but
in that case some public inconvenience might be apprehended, from
the diminished quantity which would then run to waste: the
streams of water running through the sewers in London, are
largely supplied from this source; and if this supply were
diminished, the drainage of the metropolis might be injuriously
affected.

379. In the north of England a powerful combination has long
existed among the coal-owners, by which the public has suffered
in the payment of increased price. The late examination of
evidence before a Committee of the House of Commons, has
explained its mode of operation, and the Committee have
recommended, that for the present the sale of coal should be left
to the competition of other districts.

380. A combination, of another kind, exists at this moment to
a great extent, and operates upon the price of the very pages
which are now communicating information respecting it. A subject
so interesting to every reader, and still more so to every
manufacturer ofthe article which the reader consumes, deserves an
attentive examination.

We have shown in Chapter XXI, p. 144, the component parts of
the expense of each copy of the present work; and we have seen
that the total amount of the cost of its production, exclusive of
any payment to the author for his labour, is 2s. 3d.(1*)

Another fact, with which the reader is more practically
familiar, is that he has paid, or is to pay, to his bookseller,
six shillings for the volume. Let us now examine into the
distribution of these six shillings, and then, having the facts
ofthe case before us, we shall be better able to judgeofthe
meritsofthe combinationjust mentioned, andtoexplainits effects.

 Distribution of the profits on a six shilling book

 Buys at; Sells at; Profit on capital expended
 s. d.; s. d.

No. I--The publisher who accounts to the author for every copy
received; 3 10; 4 2; 10 per cent
No. II--The bookseller who retails to the public; 4 2; 6 0; 44
 Or, 4 6; 6 0; 33 1/3


No. I, the publisher, is a bookseller; he is, in fact, the
author's agent. His duties are, to receive and take charge of the
stock, for which he supplies warehouse room; to advise the author
about the times and methods of advertising; and to insert the
advertisements. As he publishes other books, he will advertise
lists of those sold by himself; and thus, by combining many in
one advertisement, diminish the expense to each of his
principals. He pays the author only for the books actually sold;
consequently, he makes no outlav of capital, except that which he
pays for advertisements: but he is answerable for any bad debts
he may contract in disposing of them. His charge is usually ten
per cent on the returns.

No. II is the bookseller who retails the work to the public.
On the publication of a new book, the publisher sends round to
the trade, to receive 'subscriptions' from them for any number of
copies not less than two. These copies are usually charged to the
'subscribers', on an average, at about four or five per cent less
than the wholesale price of the book: in the present case the
subscription price is 4s. 2d. for each copy. After the day of
publication, the price charged by the publisher to the
booksellers is 4s. 6d. With some works it is the custom to
deliver twenty-five copies to those who order twenty-four, thus
allowing a reduction of about four per cent. Such was the case
with the present volume. Different publishers offer different
terms to the subscribers; and it is usual, after intervals of
about six months, for the publisher again to open a subscription
list, so that if the work be one for which there is a steady
sale, the trade avail themselves of these opportunities
of purchasing, at the reduced rate, enough to supply their
probable demand.(2*)

381. The volume thus purchased of the publisher at 4s. 2d. or
4s. 6d. is retailed by the bookseller to the public at 6s. In the
first case he makes a profit of forty-four, in the second of
thirty-three per cent. Even the smaller of these two rates of
profit on the capital employed, appears to be much too large. It
may sometimes happen, that when a book is enquired for, the
retail dealer sends across the street to the wholesale agent, and
receives, for this trifling service, one fourth part of the money
paid by the purchaser; and perhaps the retail dealer takes also
six months' credit for the price which the volume actually cost
him.

382. In section 256, the price of each process in
manufacturing the present volume was stated: we shall now give an
analysis of the whole expense of conveying it into the hands of
the public.

 The retail price 6s. on 3052 produces 915 12 0

1. Total expense of printing and paper 207 5 8 7/11
2. Taxes on paper and advertisements 40 0 11
3. Commission to publisher as agent between author and printer 18
14 4 4/11 4 Commission to publisher as agent for sale of the book
63 11 8
5. Profit--the difference between subscription price and trade
price, 4d. per vol. 50 17 4
6. Profit the difference between trade price and retail price,
1s. 6d. per vol. 228 18 0
            362 1 4
7. Remains for authorship 306 4 0

 Total 915 12 0


This account appears to disagree with that in page 146. but
it will be observed that the three first articles amount to L266
1s., the sum there stated. The apparent difference arises from a
circumstance which was not noticed in the first edition of this
work. The bill amounting to L205 18s., as there given, and as
reprinted in the present volume, included an additional charge of
ten per cent upon the real charges of the printer and
paper-maker.

383. It is usual for the publisher, when he is employed as
agent between the author and printer, to charge a commission of
ten per cent on all payments he makes. If the author is informed
of this custom previously to his commencing the work, as was the
case in the present instance, he can have no just cause of
complaint; for it is optional whether he himself employs the
printer, or communicates with him through the intervention of his
publisher.

The services rendered for this payment are, the making
arrangements with the printer, the wood-cutter, and the engraver,
if required. There is a convenience in having some intermediate
person between the author and printer, in case the former should
consider any of the charges made by the latter as too high. When
the author himself is quite unacquainted with the details of the
art of printing, he may object to charges which, on a better
acquaintance with the subject, he might be convinced were very
moderate; and in such cases he ought to depend on the judgement
of his publisher, who is generally conversant with the art. This
is particularly the case in the charge for alterations and
corrections, some of which, although apparently trivial, occupy
the compositors much time in making. It should also be observed
that the publisher, in this case, becomes responsible for the
payments to those persons.

384. It is not necessary that the author should avail himself
of this intervention, although it is the interest of the
publisher that he should; and booksellers usually maintain that
the author cannot procure his paper or printing at a cheaper rate
if he go at once to the producers. This appears from the evidence
given before the Committee of the House of Commons in the
Copyright Acts, 8 May, 1818.

Mr O. Rees, bookseller, of the house of Longman and Co.,
Paternoster Row, examined:

Q. Suppose a gentleman to publish a work on his own account,
and to incur all the various expenses; could he get the paper at
30s. a ream?

A. I presume not; I presume a stationer would not sell the
paper at the same price to an indifferent gentleman as to the
trade.

Q. The Committee asked you if a private gentleman was to
publish a work on his own account, if he would not pay more for
the paper than persons in the trade; the Committee wish to be
informed whether a printer does not charge a gentleman a higher
rate than to a publisher.

A. I conceive they generally charge a profit on the paper.

Q. Do not the printers charge a higher price also for
printing, than they do to the trade?

A. I always understood that they do.

385. There appears to be little reason for this distinction
in charging for printing a larger price to the author than to the
publisher, provided the former is able to give equal security for
the payment. With respect to the additional charge on paper, if
the author employs either publisher or printer to purchase it,
they ought to receive a moderate remuneration for the risk, since
they become responsible for the payment; but there is no reason
why, if the author deals at once with the paper-maker, he should
not purchase on the same terms as the printer; and if he choose,
by paying ready money, not to avail himself of the long credit
allowed in those trades, he ought to procure his paper
considerably cheaper.

386. It is time, however, that such conventional combinations
between different trades should be done away with. In a country
so eminently depending for its wealth on its manufacturing
industry, it is of importance that there should exist no abrupt
distinction of classes, and that the highest of the aristocracy
should feel proud of being connected, either personally or
through their relatives, with those pursuits on which their
country's greatness depends. The wealthier manufacturers and
merchants already mix with those classes, and the larger and even
the middling tradesmen are frequently found associating with the
gentry of the land. It is good that this ambition should be
cultivated, not by any rivalry in expense, but by a rivalry in
knowledge and in liberal feelings; and few things would more
contribute to so desirable an effect, than the abolition of all
such contracted views as those to which we have alluded. The
advantage to the other classes, would be an increased
acquaintance with the productive arts of the country an increased
attention to the importance of acquiring habits of punctuality
and of business and, above all, a general feeling that it is
honourable, in any rank of life, to increase our own and our
country's riches, by employing our talents in the production or
in the distribution of wealth.

387. Another circumstance omitted to be noticed in the first
edition relates to what is technically called the overplus, which
may be now explained. When 500 copies of a work are to be
printed, each sheet of it requires one ream of paper. Now a ream,
as used by printers, consists of 21 1/2 quires, or 516 sheets.
This excess of sixteen sheets is necessary in order to allow for
'revises'--for preparing and adjusting the press for the due
performance of its work, and to supply the place of any sheets
which may be accidentally dirtied or destroyed in the processes
of printing, or injured by the binder in putting into boards. It
is found, however, that three per cent is more than the
proportion destroyed, and that damage is less frequent in
proportion to the skill and care of the workmen.

From the evidence of several highly respectable booksellers
and printers, before the Committee of the House of Commons on the
Copyright Act, May, 1818, it appears that the average number of
surplus copies, above 500, is between two and three; that on
smaller impressions it is less, whilst on larger editions it is
greater; that, in some instances, the complete number of 500 is
not made up, in which case the printer is obliged to pay for
completing it; and that in no instance have the whole sixteen
extra copies been completed. On the volume in the reader's hands,
the edition of which consisted of 3000, the surplus amounted to
fifty-two--a circumstance arising from the improvements in
printing and the increased care of the pressmen. Now this
overplus ought to be accounted for to the author--and I believe
it usually is so by all respectable publishers.

388. In order to prevent the printer from privately taking
off a larger number of impressions than he delivers to the author
or publisher, various expedients have been adopted. In some works
a particular watermark has been used in paper made purposely for
the book: thus the words 'Mecanique Celeste' appear in the
watermark of the two first volumes of the great work of Laplace.
In other cases, where the work is illustrated by engravings, such
a fraud would be useless without the concurrence of the
copperplate printer. In France it is usual to print a notice on
the back of the title page, that no copies are genuine without
the subjoined signature of the author: and attached to this
notice is the author's name, either written, or printed by hand
from a wooden block. But notwithstanding this precaution, I have
recently purchased a volume, printed at Paris, in which the
notice exists, but no signature is attached. In London there is
not much danger of such frauds, because the printers are men of
capital, to whom the profit on such a transaction would be
trifling, and the risk of the detection of a fact, which must of
necessity be known to many of their workmen, would be so great as
to render the attempt at it folly.

389. Perhaps the best advice to an author, if he publishes on
his own account, and is a reasonable person, possessed of common
sense, would be to go at once to a respectable printer and make
his arrangements with him.

390. If the author do not wish to print his work at his own
risk, then he should make an agreement with a publisher for an
edition of a limited number; but he should by no means sell the
copyright. If the work contains woodcuts or engravings, it would
be judicious to make it part of the contract that they shall
become the author's property, with the view to their use in a
subsequent edition of the works, if they should be required. An
agreement is frequently made by which the publisher advances the
money and incurs all the risk on condition of his sharing the
profits with the author. The profits alluded to are, for the
present work, the last item of section 382, or L306 4s.

391. Having now explained all the arrangements in printing
the present volume, let us return to section 382, and examine the
distribution of the L915 paid by the public. Of this sum L207 was
the cost of the book, L40 was taxes, L362 was the charges of the
bookseller in conveying it to the consumer, and L306 remained for
authorship.

The largest portion, or L362 goes into the pockets of the
booksellers; and as they do not advance capital, and incur very
little risk, this certainly appears to be an unreasonable
allowance. The most extravagant part of the charge is the
thirty-three per cent which is allowed as profit on retailing the
book.

It is stated, however, that all retail booksellers allow to
their customers a discount of ten per cent upon orders above
20s., and that consequently the nominal profit of forty-four or
thirty-three per cent is very much reduced. If this is the case,
it may fairly be enquired, why the price of L2 for example, is
printed upon the back of a book, when every bookseller is ready
to sell it at L1 16s., and why those who are unacquainted with
that circumstance should be made to pay more than others who are
better informed?

392. Several reasons have been alleged as justifying this
high rate of profit.

First, it has been alleged that the purchasers of books take
long credit. This, probably, is often the case, and admitting it,
no reasonable person can object to a proportionate increase of
price. But it is no less clear, that persons who do pay ready
money, should not be charged the same price as those who defer
their payments to a remote period.

Secondly, it has been urged that large profits are necessary
to pay for the great expenses of bookselling establishments; that
rents are high and taxes heavy; and that it would be impossible
for the great booksellers to compete with the smaller ones,
unless the retail profits were great. In reply to this it may be
observed that the booksellers are subject to no peculiar pressure
which does not attach to all other retail trades. It may also be
remarked that large establishments always have advantages over
smaller ones, in the economy arising from the division of labour;
and it is scarcely to be presumed that booksellers are the only
class who, in large concerns, neglect to avail themselves of
them.

Thirdly, it has been pretended that this high rate of profit
is necessary to cover the risk of the bookseller's having some
copies left on his shelves; but he is not obliged to buy of the
publisher a single copy more than he has orders for: and if he do
purchase more, at the subscription price, he proves, by the very
fact, that he himself does not estimate that risk at more than
from four to eight per cent.

393. It has been truly observed, on the other hand, that many
copies of books are spoiled by persons who enter the shops of
booksellers without intending to make any purchase. But, not to
mention that such persons finding on the tables various new
publications, are frequently induced, by that opportunity of
inspecting them, to become purchasers: this damage does not apply
to all booksellers nor to all books; of course it is not
necessary to keep in the shop books of small probable demand or
great price. In the present case, the retail profit on three
copies only, namely, 4s. 6d., would pay the whole cost of the one
copy soiled in the shop; and even that copy might afterwards
produce, at an auction, half or a third of its cost price. The
argument, therefore, from disappointments in the sale of books,
and that arising from heavy stock, are totally groundless in the
question between publisher and author. It shold be remarked also,
that the publisher is generally a retail, as well as a wholesale,
bookseller; and that, besides his profit upon every copy which he
sells in his capacity of agent, he is allowed to charge the
author as if every copy had been subscribed for at 4s. 2d., and
of course he receives the same profit as the rest of the
wholesale traders for the books retailed in his own shop.

394. In the country, there is more reason for a considerable
allowance between the retail dealer and the public; because the
profit of the country bookseller is diminished by the expense of
the carriage of the books from London. He must also pay a
commission, usually five per cent, to his London agent, on all
those books which his correspondent does not himself publish. If
to this be added a discount of five per cent, allowed for ready
money to every customer, and of ten per cent to book clubs, the
profit of the bookseller in a small country town is by no means
too large.

Some of the writers, who have published criticisms on the
observations made in the first edition of this work, have
admitted that the apparent rate of profit to the booksellers is
too large. But they have, on the other hand, urged that too
favourable a case is taken in supposing the whole 3000 copies
sold. If the reader will turn back to section 382, he will find
that the expense of the three first items remains the same,
whatever be the number of copies sold; and on looking over the
remaining items he will perceive that the bookseller, who incurs
very little risk and no outlay, derives exactly the same profit
per cent on the copies sold, whatever their numbers may be. This,
however, is not the case with the unfortunate author, on whom
nearly the whole of the loss falls undivided. The same writers
have also maintained, that the profit is fixed at the rate
mentioned, in order to enable the bookseller to sustain losses,
unavoidably incurred in the purchase and retail of other books.
This is the weakest of all arguments. It would be equally just
that a merchant should charge an extravagant commission for an
undertaking unaccompanied with any risk, in order to repay
himself for the losses which his own want of skill might lead to
in his other mercantile transactions.

395. That the profit in retailing books is really too large,
is proved by several circumstances: First, that the same nominal
rate of profit has existed in the bookselling trade for a long
series of years, notwithstanding the great fluctuations in the
rate of profit on capital invested in every other business.
Secondly, that, until very lately, a multitude of booksellers, in
all parts of London, were content with a much smaller profit, and
were willing to sell for ready money, or at short credit, to
persons of undoubted character, at a profit of only ten per cent,
and in some instances even at a still smaller percentage, instead
of that of twenty-five per cent on the published prices. Thirdly,
that they are unable to maintain this rate of profit except by a
combination, the object of which is to put down all competition.

396. Some time ago a small number of the large London
booksellers entered into such a combination. One of their objects
was to prevent any bookseller from selling books for less than
ten per cent under the published prices; and in order to enforce
this principle, they refuse to sell books, except at the
publishing price, to any bookseller who declines signing an
agreement to that effect. By degrees, many were prevailed upon to
join this combination; and the effect of the exclusion it
inflicted, left the small capitalist no option between signing or
having his business destroyed. Ultimately, nearly the whole
trade, comprising about two thousand four hundred persons, have
been compelled to sign the agreement.

As might be naturally expected from a compact so injurious to
many of the parties to it, disputes have arisen; several
booksellers have been placed under the ban of the combination,
who allege that they have not violated its rules, and who accuse
the opposite party of using spies, etc., to entrap them.(3*)

397. The origin of this combination has been explained by Mr
Pickering, of Chancery Lane, himself a publisher, in a printed
statement, entitled, 'Booksellers' Monopoly' and the following
list of booksellers, who form the committee for conducting this
combination, is copied from that printed at the head of each of
the cases published by Mr Pickering:

 Allen, J., 7, Leadenhall Street.
 Arch, J., 61, Cornhill.
 Baldwin, R., 47, Paternoster Row.
 Booth, J.
 Duncan, J., 37, Paternoster Row.
 Hatchard, J., Piccadilly.
 Marshall, R., Stationers' Court.
 Murray, J., Albemarle Street.
 Rees, O., 39, Paternoster Row.
 Richardson, J. M., 23, Cornhill.
 Rivington, J., St. Paul's Churchyard.
 Wilson, E., Royal Exchange.


398. In whatever manner the profits are divided between the
publisher and the retail bookseller, the fact remains, that the
reader pays for the volume in his hands 6s., and that the author
will receive only 3s. 10d.; out of which latter sum, the expense
of printing the volume must be paid: so that in passing through
two hands this book has produced a profit of forty-four per cent.
This excessive rate of profit has drawn into the book trade a
larger share of capital than was really advantageous; and the
competition between the different portions of that capital has
naturally led to the system of underselling, to which the
committee above mentioned are endeavouring to put a stop.(4*)

399. There are two parties who chiefly suffer from this
combination, the public and authors. The first party can seldom be
induced to take an active part against any grievance; and in fact
little is required from it, except a cordial support of the
authors, in any attempt to destroy a combination so injurious to
the interests of both.

Many an industrious bookseller would be glad to sell for 5s.
the volume which the reader holds in his hand, and for which he
has paid 6s.; and, in doing so for ready money, the tradesman who
paid 4s. 6d. for the book, would realize, without the least risk,
a profit of eleven per cent on the money he had advanced. It is
one of the objects of the combination we are discussing, to
prevent the small capitalist from employing his capital at that
rate of profit which he thinks most advantageous to himself; and
such a proceeding is decidedly injurious to the public.

400. Having derived little pecuniary advantage from my own
literary productions; and being aware, that from the very nature
of their subjects, they can scarcely be expected to reimburse the
expense of preparing them, I may be permitted to offer an opinion
upon the subject, which I believe to be as little influenced by
any expectation of advantage from the future, as it is by any
disappointment at the past.

Before, however, we proceed to sketch the plan of a campaign
against Paternoster Row, it will be fit to inform the reader of
the nature of the enemies' forces, and of his means of attack and
defence. Several of the great publishers find it convenient to be
the proprietors of reviews, magazines, journals, and even of
newspapers. The editors are paid, in some instances very
handsomely, for their superintendence; and it is scarcely to be
expected that they should always mete out the severest justice on
works by the sale of which their employers are enriched. The
great and popular works of the day are, of course, reviewed with
some care, and with deference to public opinion. Without this,
the journals would not sell; and it is convenient to be able to
quote such articles as instances of impartiality. Under shelter
of this, a host of ephemeral productions are written into a
transitory popularity; and by the aid of this process, the
shelves of the booksellers, as well as the pockets of the public,
are disencumbered. To such an extent are these means employed,
that some of the periodical publications of the day ought to be
regarded merely as advertising machines. That the reader may be
in some measure on his guard against such modes of influencing
his judgement, he should examine whether the work reviewed is
published by the bookseller who is the proprietor of the review;
a fact which can sometimes be ascertained from the title of the
book as given at the head of the article. But this is by no means
a certain criterion, because partnerships in various publications
exist between houses in the book trade, which are not generally
known to the public; so that, in fact, until reviews are
established in which booksellers have no interest, they can never
be safely trusted.

401. In order to put down the combination of booksellers, no
plan appears so likely to succeed as a counter-association of
authors. If any considerable portion of the literary world were
to unite and form such an association; and if its affairs were
directed by an active committee, much might be accomplished. The
objects of such an union should be, to employ some person well
skilled in the printing, and in the bookselling trade; and to
establish him in some central situation as their agent. Each
member of the association to be at liberty to place any, or all
of his works in the hands of this agent for sale; to allow any
advertisements, or list of books published by members of the
association, to be stitched up at the end of each of his own
productions; the expense of preparing them being defrayed by the
proprietors of the books advertised.

The duties of the agent would be to retail to the public, for
ready money, copies of books published by members of the
association. To sell to the trade, at prices agreed upon, any
copies they may require. To cause to be inserted in the journals,
or at the end of works published by members, any advertisements
which the committee or authors may direct. To prepare a general
catalogue of the works of members. To be the agent for any member
of the association respecting the printing of any work.

Such a union would naturally present other advantages; and as
each author would retain the liberty of putting any price he
might think fit on his productions, the public would have the
advantage of reduction in price produced by competition between
authors on the same subject, as well as of that arising from a
cheaper mode of publishing the volumes sold to them.

402. Possibly, one of the consequences resulting from such an
association, would be the establishment of a good and an
impartial review, a work the want of which has been felt for
several years. The two long-established and celebrated reviews,
the unbending champions of the most opposite political opinions.
are, from widely differing causes, exhibiting unequivocal signs
of decrepitude and decay. The quarterly advocate of despotic
principles is fast receding from the advancing intelligence of
the age; the new strength and new position which that
intelligence has acquired, demands for its expression, new
organs, equally the representatives of its intellectual power,
and of its moral energies: whilst, on the other hand, the sceptre
of the northern critics has passed, from the vigorous grasp of
those who established its dominion, into feebler hands.

403. It may be stated as a difficulty in realizing this
suggestion, that those most competent to supply periodical
criticism, are already engaged. But it is to be observed, that
there are many who now supply literary criticisms to journals,
the political principles of which they disapprove; and that if
once a respectable and well-supported review(5*) were
established, capable of competing, in payment to its
contributors, with the wealthiest of its rivals, it would very
soon be supplied with the best materials the country can produce.
(6*) It may also be apprehended that such a combination of
authors would be favourable to each other. There are two
temptations to which an editor of a review is commonly exposed:
the first is, a tendency to consult too much, in the works he
criticizes, the interest of the proprietor of his review; the
second, a similar inclination to consult the interests of his
friends. The plan which has been proposed removes one of these
temptations, but it would be very difficult, if not impossible,
to destroy the other.

NOTES:

1. The whole of the subsequent details relate to the first
edition of this work.

2. These details vary with different books and different
publishers; those given in the text are believed to substantially
correct, and are applicable to works like the present.

3. It is now understood that the use of spies has been given up;
and it is also known that the system of underselling is again
privately resorted to by many, so that the injury arising from
this arbitrary system, pursued by the great booksellers, affects
only, or most severely, those whose adherence to an extorted
promise most deserves respect. Note to the second edition.

4 The monopoly cases. Nos. 1. 2. and 3. of those published by Mr
Pickering, should be consulted upon this point; and, as the
public will be better able to form a judgement by hearing the
other side of the question, it is to be hoped the Chairman of the
Committee (Mr Richardson) will publish those regulations
respecting the trade, a copy of which. Mr Pickering states, is
refused by the Committee even to those who sign them.

5. At the moment when this opinion as to the necessity for a new
review was passing through the press. I was informed that the
elements of such an undertaking were already organized.

6. I have been suggested to me, that the doctrines maintained in
this chapter may subject the present volume to the opposition of
that combination which it has opposed. I do not entertain that
opinion; and for this reason, that the booksellers are too shrewd
a class to supply such an admirable passport to publicity as
their opposition would prove to be if generally suspected. But
should my readers take a different view of the question, they can
easily assist in remedying the evil, by each mentioning the
existence of this little volume to two of his friends.

{I was wrong in this conjecture; all booksellers are not so
shrewd as I had imagined, for some did refuse to sell this
volume; consequently others sold a larger number of copies.

In the preface to the second edition, at the commencement of
this volume, the reader will find some further observation on the
effect of the booksellers' combination.}



Chapter 32

On the Effect of Machinery in Reducing the Demand for Labour

404. One of the objections most frequently urged against
machinery is, that it has a tendency to supersede much of the
hand labour which was previously employed; and in fact unless a
machine diminished the labour necessary to make an article, it
could never come into use. But if it have that effect, its owner,
in order to extend the sale of his produce, will be obliged to
undersell his competitors; this will induce them also to
introduce the new machine, and the effect of this competition
will soon cause the article to fall, until the profits on
capital, under the new system, shall be reduced to the same rate
as under the old. Although, therefore, the use of machinery has
at first a tendency to throw labour out of employment, yet the
increased demand consequent upon the reduced price, almost
immediately absorbs a considerable portion of that labour, and
perhaps, in some cases, the whole of what would otherwise have
been displaced.

That the effect of a new machine is to diminish the labour
required for the production of the same quantity of manufactured
commodities may be clearly perceived, by imagining a society,
in which occupations are not divided, each man himself manufacturing
all the articles he consumes. Supposing each individual to labour
during ten hours daily, one of which is devoted to making shoes,
it is evident that if any tool or machine be introduced, by the
use of which his shoes can be made in half the usual time, then
each member of the community will enjoy the same comforts as
before by only nine and one-half hours' labour.

405. If, therefore, we wish to prove that the total quantity
of labour is not diminished by the introduction of machines, we must
have recourse to some other principle of our nature. But the same
motive which urges a man to activity will become additionally
powerful, when he finds his comforts procured with diminished
labour; and in such circumstances, it is probable, that many
would employ the time thus redeemed in contriving new tools for
other branches of their occupations. He who has habitually worked
ten hours a day, will employ the half hour saved by the new
machine in gratifying some other want; and as each new machine
adds to these gratifications, new luxuries will open to his view,
which continued enjoyment will as surely render necessary to his
happiness.

406. In countries where occupations are divided, and where
the division of labour is practised, the ultimate consequence of
improvements in machinery is almost invariably to cause a greater
demand for labour. Frequently the new labour requires, at its
commencement, a higher degree of skill than the old; and,
unfortunately, the class of persons driven out of the old
employment are not always qualified for the new one; so that a
certain interval must elapse before the whole of their labour is
wanted. This, for a time, produces considerable suffering amongst
the working classes; and it is of great importance for their
happiness that they should be aware of these effects, and be
enabled to foresee them at an early period, in order to diminish,
as much as possible, the injury resulting from them.

407. One very important enquiry which this subject presents
is the question whether it is more for the interest of the
working classes, that improved machinery should be so perfect as
to defy the competition of hand labour; and that they should thus
be at once driven out of the trade by it; or be gradually forced
to quit it by the slow and successive advances of the machine?
The suffering which arises from a quick transition is undoubtedly
more intense; but it is also much less permanent than that which
results from the slower process: and if the competition is
perceived to be perfectly hopeless, the workman will at once set
himself to learn a new department of his art. On the other hand,
although new machinery causes an increased demand for skill in
those who make and repair it, and in those who first superintend
its use; yet there are other cases in which it enables children
and inferior workmen to execute work that previously required
greater skill. In such circumstances, even though the increased
demand for the article, produced by its diminished price, should
speedily give occupation to all who were before employed, yet the
very diminution of the skill required, would open a wider field
of competition amongst the working classes themselves.

That machines do not, even at their first introduction,
invariably throw human labour out of employment, must be
admitted; and it has been maintained, by persons very competent
to form an opinion on the subject, that they never produce that
effect. The solution of this question depends on facts, which,
unfortunately, have not yet been collected: and the circumstance
of our not possessing the data necessary for the full examination
of so important a subject, supplies an additional reason for
impressing, upon the minds of all who are interested in such
enquiries, the importance of procuring accurate registries, at
various times, of the number of persons employed in particular
branches of manufacture, of the number of machines used by them.
and of the wages they receive.

408. In relation to the enquiry just mentioned, I shall offer
some remarks upon the facts within my knowledge; and only regret
that those which I can support by numerical statement are so few.
When the crushing mill, used in Cornwall and other mining
countries, superseded the labour of a great number of young
women, who worked very hard in breaking ores with flat hammers,
no distress followed. The reason of this appears to have been,
that the proprietors of the mines, having one portion of their
capital released by the superior cheapness of the process
executed by the mills, found it their interest to apply more
labour to other operations. The women, disengaged from mere
drudgery, were thus profitably employed in dressing the ores, a
work which required skill and judgement in the selection.

409. The increased production arising from alterations in the
machinery, or from improved modes of using it, appears from the
following table. A machine called in the cotton manufacture a
'stretcher', worked by one man, produced as follows:

 Year; Pounds of cotton spun; Roving wages per score; Rate of
earning per week
                s. d. s. d.

 1810 400 1 31/2 25 10(1*)
 1811 600 0 10 25 0
 1813 850 0 9 31 101/2
 1823 1000 0 71/2 31 3

 The same man working at another stretcher, the roving a little
finer, produced,

 1823 900 0 71/2 28 11/2
 1825 1000 0 7 27 6
 1827 1200 0 6 30 0
 1832 1200 0 6 30 0

In this instance, production has gradually increased until, at
the end of twenty-two years, three times as much work is done as
at the commencement, although the manual labour employed remains
the same. The weekly earnings of the workmen have not fluctuated
very much, and appear, on the whole, to have advanced: but it
would be imprudent to push too far reasonings founded upon a
single instance.

410. The produce of 480 spindles of 'mule yarn spinning', at
different periods, was as follows:

Year; Hanks about 40 to the pound; Wages per thousand (s. d.)

1806; 6668; 9 2
1823; 8000; 6 3
1832; 10,000; 3 8


411. The subjoined view of the state of weaving by hand- and
by power-looms, at Stockport, in the years 1822 and 1832, is
taken from an enumeration of the machines contained in 65
factories, and was collected for the purpose of being given in
evidence before a Committee of the House of Commons.

                            In 1822   In 1832
 Hand-loom weavers          2800          800    2000 decrease
 Persons using power-looms   657         3059    2402 increase
 Persons to dress the warp    98          388     290 increase
 Total persons employed     3555         4247     692 increase
 Power-looms                1970         9177    8207 increase

During this period, the number of hand-looms in employment has
diminished to less than one-third, whilst that of power-looms has
increased to more than five times its former amount. The total
number of workmen has increased about one-third; but the amount
of manufactured goods (supposing each power-loom to do only the
work of three hand-looms) is three and a half times as large as
it was before.

412. In considering this increase of employment, it must be
admitted, that the two thousand persons thrown out of work are
not exactly of the same class as those called into employment by
the power-looms. A hand-weaver must possess bodily strength,
which is not essential for a person attending a power-loom;
consequently, women and young persons of both sexes, from fifteen
to seventeen years of age, find employment in power-loom
factories. This, however, would be a very limited view of the
employment arising from the introduction of power-looms: the
skill called into action in building the new factories, in
constructing the new machinery, in making the steam-engines to
drive it, and in devising improvements in the structure of the
looms, as well as in regulating the economy of the establishment,
is of a much higher order than that which it had assisted in
superseding; and if we possessed any means of measuring this, it
would probably be found larger in amount. Nor, in this view of
the subject, must we omit the fact, that although hand-looms
would have increased in number if those moved by steam had not
been invented, yet it is the cheapness of the article
manufactured by power-looms which has caused this great extension
of their employment, and that by diminishing the price of one
article of commerce, we always call into additional activity the
energy of those who produce others. It appears that the number of
hand-looms in use in England and Scotland in 1830, was about
240,000; nearly the same number existed in the year 1820: whereas
the number of power-looms which, in 1830, was 55,000, had, in
1820, been 14,000. When it is considered that each of these
powerlooms did as much work as three worked by hand, the
increased producing power was equal to that of 123,000
hand-looms. During the whole of this period the wages and
employment of hand-loom weavers have been very precarious.

413. Increased intelligence amongst the working classes, may
enable them to foresee some of those improvements which are
likely for a time to affect the value of their labour; and the
assistance of savings banks and friendly societies, (the
advantages of which can never be too frequently, or too strongly,
pressed upon their attention), may be of some avail in remedying
the evil: but it may be useful also to suggest to them, that a
diversity of employments amongst the members of one family will
tend, in some measure, to mitigate the privations which arise
from fluctuation in the value of labour.

NOTES:

1. In 1810, the workman's wages were guaranteed not to be less
than 26s.



Chapter 33

On the Effect of Taxes and of Legal Restrictions upon
Manufactures

414. As soon as a tax is put upon any article, the ingenuity
of those who make, and of those who use it, is directed to the
means of evading as large a part of the tax as they can; and this
may often be accomplished in ways which are perfectly fair and
legal. An excise duty exists at present of 3d.(1*) per pound upon
all writing paper. The effect of this impost is, that much of the
paper which is employed, is made extremely thin, in order that
the weight of a given number of sheets may be as small as
possible. Soon after the first imposition of the tax upon
windows, which depended upon their number, and not upon their
size, new-built houses began to have fewer windows and those of
larger dimensions than before. Staircases were lighted by
extremely long windows, illuminating three or four flights of
stairs. When the tax was increased, and the size of windows
charged as single was limited, then still greater care was taken
to have as few windows as possible, and internal lights became
frequent. These internal lights in their turn became the subject
of taxation; but it was easy to evade the discovery of them, and
in the last Act of Parliament reducing the assessed taxes, they
ceased to be chargeable. From the changes thus successively
introduced in the number the forms, and the positions of the
windows, a tolerable conjecture might, in some instances, be
formed of the age of a house.

415. A tax on windows is exposed to objection on the double
ground of its excluding air and light, and it is on both accounts
injurious to health. The importance of light to the enjoyment of
health is not perhaps sufficiently appreciated: in the cold and
more variable climates, it is of still greater importance than in
warmer countries.

416. The effects of regulations of excise upon our home
manufactures are often productive of great inconvenience; and
check, materially, the natural progress of improvement. It is
frequently necessary, for the purposes of revenue, to oblige
manufacturers to take out a license, and to compel them to work
according to certain rules, and to make certain stated quantities
at each operation. When these quantities are large, as in general
they are, they deter manufacturers from making experiments, and
thus impede improvements both in the mode of conducting the
processes and in the introduction of new materials. Difficulties
of this nature have occurred in experimenting upon glass for
optical purposes; but in this case, permission has been obtained
by fit persons to make experiments, without the interference of
the excise. It ought, however, to be remembered, that such
permission, if frequently or indiscriminately granted, might be
abused: the greatest protection against such an abuse will be
found, in bringing the force of public opinion to bear upon
scientific men and thus enabling the proper authorities, although
themselves but moderately conversant with science, to judge of
the propriety of the permission, from the public character of the
applicant.

417. From the evidence given, in 1808, before the Committee
of the House of Commons, On Distillation from Sugar and Molasses,
it appeared that, by a different mode of working from that
prescribed by the Excise, the spirits from a given weight of
corn, which then produced eighteen gallons, might easily have
been increased to twenty gallons. Nothing more is required for
this purpose, than to make what is called the wash weaker, the
consequence of which is, that fermentation goes on to a greater
extent. It was stated, however, that such a deviation would
render the collection of the duty liable to great difficulties;
and that it would not benefit the distiller much, since his price
was enhanced to the customer by any increase of expense in the
fabrication. Here then is a case in which a quantity, amounting
to one-ninth of the total produce, is actually lost to the
country. A similar effect arises in the coal trade, from the
effect of a duty, for, according to the evidence before the
House of Commons, it appears that a considerable quantity of the
very best coal is actually wasted. The extent of this waste is
very various in different mines; but in some cases it amounts to
one-third.

418. The effects of duties upon the import of foreign
manufactures are equally curious. A singular instance occurred in
the United States, where bar-iron was, on its introduction.
liable to a duty of 140 per cent ad valorem, whilst hardware was
charged at 25 per cent only. In consequence of this tax, large
quantities of malleable iron rails for railroads were imported
into America under the denomination of hardware; the difference
of 115 per cent in duty more than counter balancing the expense
of fashioning the iron into rails prior to its importation.

419. Duties, drawbacks, and bounties, when considerable in
amount, are all liable to objections of a very serious nature,
from the frauds to which they give rise. It has been stated
before Committees of the House of Commons, that calicoes made up
in the form, and with the appearance of linen, have frequently
been exported for the purpose of obtaining the bounty, for
calico made up in this way sells only at 1s. 4d. per yard,
whereas linen of equal fineness is worth from 2s. 8d. to 2s. 10d.
per yard. It appeared from the evidence, that one house in six
months sold five hundred such pieces of calico.

In almost all cases heavy duties, or prohibitions, are
ineffective as well as injurious; for unless the articles
excluded are of very large dimensions, there constantly arises a
price at which they will be clandestinely imported by the
smuggler. The extent, therefore, to which smuggling can be
carried, should always be considered in the imposition of new
duties, or in the alteration of old ones. Unfortunately it has
been pushed so far, and is so systematically conducted between
this country and France, that the price per cent at which most
contraband articles can be procured is perfectly well known. From
the evidence of Mr Galloway, it appears that, from 30 to 40 per
cent was the rate of insurance on exporting prohibited machinery
from England, and that the larger the quantity the less was the
percentage demanded. From evidence given in the Report of the
Watch and Clock-makers' Committee, in 1817, it appears that
persons were constantly in the habit of receiving in France
watches, lace, silks, and other articles of value easily
portable, and delivering them in England at ten per cent on their
estimated worth, in which sum the cost of transport and the risk
of smuggling were included.

420. The process employed in manufacturing often depends upon
the mode in which a tax is levied on the materials, or on the
article produced. W atch glasses are made in England by workmen
who purchase from the glass house globes of five or six inches in
diameter, out of which, by means of a piece of red-hot tobacco
pipe, guided round a pattern watch glass placed on the globe,
they crack five others: these are afterwards ground and smoothed
on the edges. In the Tyrol the rough watch glasses are supplied
at once from the glass house; the workman, applying a thick ring
of cold glass to each globe as soon as it is blown, causes a
piece, of the size of a watch glass, to be cracked out. The
remaining portion of the globe is immediately broken, and returns
to the melting pot. This process could not be adopted in England
with the same economy, because the whole of the glass taken out
of the pot is subject to the excise duty.

421. The objections thus stated as incidental to particular
modes of taxation are not raised with a view to the removal of
those particular taxes; their fitness or unfitness must be
decided by a much wider enquiry, into which it is not the object
of this volume to enter. Taxes are essential for the security
both of liberty and property, and the evils which have been
mentioned may be the least amongst those which might have been
chosen. It is, however, important that the various effects of
every tax should be studied, and that those should be adopted
which, upon the whole, are found to give the least check to the
productive industry of the country.

422. In enquiring into the effect produced, or to be
apprehended from any particular mode of taxation, it is necessary
to examine a little into the interests of the parties who approve
of the plan in question, as well as of those who object to it.
Instances have occurred where the persons paying a tax into the
hands of government have themselves been adverse to any
reduction. This happened in the case of one class of
calico-printers, whose interest really was injured by a removal
of the tax on the printing: they received from the manufacturers,
payment for the duty, about two months before they were
themselves called on to pay it to government; and the consequence
was, that a considerable capital always remained in their hands.
The evidence which states this circumstance is well calculated to
promote a reasonable circumspection in such enquiries.

Question. Do you happen to know anything of an opposition
from calico printers to the repeal of the tax on printed calicoes?

Answer. I have certainly heard of such an opposition, and am
not surprised at it. There are very few individuals who are, in
fact, interested in the nonrepeal of the tax; there are two
classes of calico-printers; one, who print their own cloth, send
their goods into the market, and sell them on their own account;
they frequently advance the duty to government, and pay it in
cash before their goods are sold, but generally before the goods
are paid for, being most commonly sold on a credit of six months:
they are of course interested on that account, as well as on
others that have been stated, in the repeal of the tax. The other
class of calico-printers print the cloth of other people; they
print for hire, and on re-delivery of the cloth when printed,
they receive the amount of the duty, which they are not called
upon to pay to government sooner, on an average, than nine weeks
from the stamping of the goods. Where the business is carried on
upon a large scale, the arrears of duty due to government often
amount to eight, or even ten thousand pounds, and furnish a
capital with which these gentlemen carry on their business; it is
not, therefore, to be wondered at that they should be opposed to
the prayer of our petition.

423. The policy of giving bounties upon home productions, and
of enforcing restrictions against those which can be produced
more cheaply in other countries, is of a very questionable
nature: and, except for the purpose of introducing a new
manufacture, in a country where there is not much commercial or
manufacturing spirit, is scarcely to be defended. All incidental
modes of taxing one class of the community, the consumers, to an
unknown extent, for the sake of supporting another class, the
manufacturers, who would otherwise abandon that mode of employing
their capital, are highly objectionable. One part of the price of
any article produced under such circumstances, consists of the
expenditure, together with the ordinary profits of capital: the
other part of its price may be looked upon as charity, given to
induce the manufacturer to continue an unprofitable use of his
capital, in order to give employment to his workmen. If the sum
of what the consumers are thus forced to pay, merely on account
of these artificial restrictions, where generally known, its
amount would astonish even those who advocate them; and it would
be evident to both parties, that the employment of capital in
those branches of trade ought to be abandoned.

424. The restriction of articles produced in a manufactory to
certain sizes, is attended with some good effect in an economical
view, arising chiefly from the smaller number of different tools
required in making them, as well as from less frequent change in
the adjustment of those tools. A similar source of economy is
employed in the Navy: by having ships divided into a certain
number of classes, each of which comprises vessels of the same
dimensions, the rigging made for one vessel will fit any other of
its class; a circumstance which renders the supply of distant
stations more easy.

425. The effects of the removal of a monopoly are often very
important, and they were perhaps never more remarkable than in
the bobbin net trade, in the years 1824 and 1825. These effects
were, however, considerably enhanced by the general rage for
speculation which was so prevalent during that singular period.
One of the patents of Mr Heathcote for a bobbin net machine had
just then expired, whilst another, for an improvement in a
particular part of such machines, called a turn again, had yet a
few years to run. Many licenses had been granted to use the
former patent, which were charged at the rate of about five
pounds per annum for each quarter of a yard in width, so that
what is termed a six-quarter frame (which makes bobbin net a yard
and a half wide) paid thirty pounds a year. The second patent was
ultimately abandoned in August, 1823, infringements of it having
taken place.

It was not surprising that, on the removal of the monopoly
arising from this patent, a multitude of persons became desirous
of embarking in a trade which had hitherto yielded a very large
profit. The bobbin net machine occupies little space; and is,
from that circumstance, well adapted for a domestic manufacture.
The machines which already existed, were principally in the hands
of the manufacturers; but, a kind of mania for obtaining them
seized on persons of all descriptions, who could raise a small
capital; and, under its influence, butchers, bakers, small
farmers, publicans, gentlemen's servants, and, in some cases,
even clergymen, became anxious to possess bobbin net machines.

Some few machines were rented; but, in most of these cases,
the workman purchased the machine he employed, by instalments of
from L3 to L6 weekly, for a six quarter machine; and many
individuals, unacquainted with the mode of using the machines so
purchased, paid others of more experience for instructing them in
their use; L50 or L60 being sometimes given for this instruction.
The success of the first speculators induced others to follow the
example; and the machine-makers were almost overwhelmed with
orders for lace frames. Such was the desire to procure them, that
many persons deposited a large part, or the whole, of the price,
in the hands of the frame-makers, in order to insure their having
the earliest supply. This, as might naturally be expected, raised
the price of wages amongst the workmen employed in
machine-making; and the effect was felt at a considerable
distance from Nottingham, which was the centre of this mania.
Smiths not used to flat filing, coming from distant parts, earned
from 30s. to 42s. per week. Finishing smiths, accustomed to the
work, gained from L3 to L4 per week..The forging smith, if
accustomed to his work, gained from L5 to L6 per week, and some
few earned L10 per week. In making what are technically called
insides, those who were best paid, were generally clock- and
watchmakers, from all the districts round, who received from L3
to L4 per week. The setters-up--persons who put the parts of the
machine together--charged L20 for their assistance; and, a six
quarter machine, could be put together in a fortnight or three
weeks.

426. Good workmen, being thus induced to desert less
profitable branches of their business, in order to supply this
extraordinary demand, the masters, in other trades, soon found
their men leaving them, without being aware of the immediate
reason: some of the more intelligent, however, ascertained the
cause. They went from Birmingham to Nottingham, in order to
examine into the circumstances which had seduced almost all the
journeymen clockmakers from their own workshops; and it was soon
apparent, that the men who had been working as clockmakers in
Birmingham, at the rate of 25s. a week, could earn L2 by working
at lace frame-making in Nottingham.

On examining the nature of this profitable work, the master
clockmakers perceived that one part of the bobbin net machines,
that which held the bobbins, could easily be made in their own
workshops. They therefore contracted with the machine-makers, who
had already more work ordered than they could execute, to supply
the bobbin carriers, at a price which enabled them, on their
return home, to give such increased wages as were sufficient to
retain their own workmen, as well as yield themselves a good
profit. Thus an additional facility was afforded for the
construction of these bobbin net machines: and the conclusion was
not difficult to be foreseen. The immense supply of bobbin net
thus poured into the market, speedily reduced its price; this
reduction in price, rendered the machines by which the net was
made, less valuable; some few of the earliest producers, for a
short time, carried on a profitable trade; but multitudes were
disappointed, and many ruined. The low price at which the fabric
sold, together with its lightness and beauty, combined to extend
the sale; and ultimately, new improvements in the machines,
rendered the older ones still less valuable.

Oracle® Java ME Embedded
Developer’s Guide
Release 8.3
E73093-02
July 2016
This document is a resource for software developers and
release engineers who want to build applications for the Oracle
Java ME Embedded software for embedded devices.
Oracle Java ME Embedded Developer’s Guide, Release 8.3
E73093-02
Copyright © 2012, 2016, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
This software and related documentation are provided under a license agreement containing restrictions on
use and disclosure and are protected by intellectual property laws. Except as expressly permitted in your
license agreement or allowed by law, you may not use, copy, reproduce, translate, broadcast, modify, license,
transmit, distribute, exhibit, perform, publish, or display any part, in any form, or by any means. Reverse
engineering, disassembly, or decompilation of this software, unless required by law for interoperability, is
prohibited.
The information contained herein is subject to change without notice and is not warranted to be error-free. If
you find any errors, please report them to us in writing.
If this is software or related documentation that is delivered to the U.S. Government or anyone licensing it on
behalf of the U.S. Government, the following notice is applicable:
U.S. GOVERNMENT END USERS: Oracle programs, including any operating system, integrated software,
any programs installed on the hardware, and/or documentation, delivered to U.S. Government end users are
"commercial computer software" pursuant to the applicable Federal Acquisition Regulation and agencyspecific supplemental regulations. As such, use, duplication, disclosure, modification, and adaptation of the
programs, including any operating system, integrated software, any programs installed on the hardware,
and/or documentation, shall be subject to license terms and license restrictions applicable to the programs.
No other rights are granted to the U.S. Government.
This software or hardware is developed for general use in a variety of information management applications.
It is not developed or intended for use in any inherently dangerous applications, including applications that
may create a risk of personal injury. If you use this software or hardware in dangerous applications, then you
shall be responsible to take all appropriate fail-safe, backup, redundancy, and other measures to ensure its
safe use. Oracle Corporation and its affiliates disclaim any liability for any damages caused by use of this
software or hardware in dangerous applications.
Oracle and Java are registered trademarks of Oracle and/or its affiliates. Other names may be trademarks of
their respective owners.
Intel and Intel Xeon are trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation. All SPARC trademarks are
used under license and are trademarks or registered trademarks of SPARC International, Inc. AMD, Opteron,
the AMD logo, and the AMD Opteron logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of Advanced Micro
Devices. UNIX is a registered trademark of The Open Group.
This software or hardware and documentation may provide access to or information about content, products,
and services from third parties. Oracle Corporation and its affiliates are not responsible for and expressly
disclaim all warranties of any kind with respect to third-party content, products, and services unless
otherwise set forth in an applicable agreement between you and Oracle. Oracle Corporation and its affiliates
will not be responsible for any loss, costs, or damages incurred due to your access to or use of third-party
content, products, or services, except as set forth in an applicable agreement between you and Oracle.
This documentation is in preproduction status and is intended for demonstration and preliminary use only.
It may not be specific to the hardware on which you are using the software. Oracle Corporation and its
affiliates are not responsible for and expressly disclaim all warranties of any kind with respect to this
documentation and will not be responsible for any loss, costs, or damages incurred due to the use of this
documentation.
The information contained in this document is for informational sharing purposes only and should be
considered in your capacity as a customer advisory board member or pursuant to your beta trial agreement
only. It is not a commitment to deliver any material, code, or functionality, and should not be relied upon in
making purchasing decisions. The development, release, and timing of any features or functionality
described in this document remains at the sole discretion of Oracle.
This document in any form, software or printed matter, contains proprietary information that is the exclusive
property of Oracle. Your access to and use of this confidential material is subject to the terms and conditions
of your Oracle Master Agreement, Oracle License and Services Agreement, Oracle PartnerNetwork
Agreement, Oracle distribution agreement, or other license agreement which has been executed by you and
Oracle and with which you agree to comply. This document and information contained herein may not be
disclosed, copied, reproduced, or distributed to anyone outside Oracle without prior written consent of
Oracle. This document is not part of your license agreement nor can it be incorporated into any contractual
agreement with Oracle or its subsidiaries or affiliates.
Contents
Preface................................................................................................................................................................ ix
Audience ....................................................................................................................................................... ix
Related Documents...................................................................................................................................... ix
Operating System Commands................................................................................................................... ix
Shell Prompts................................................................................................................................................ ix
Conventions.................................................................................................................................................. ix
1 Developer Migration Guide
Overview.................................................................................................................................................... 1-1
Modified Permission Model.................................................................................................................... 1-1
Device I/O Namespace ........................................................................................................................... 1-2
Generic Connection Framework Changes ............................................................................................ 1-2
2 Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console
Design......................................................................................................................................................... 2-1
Starting the VM Proxy on the Desktop.................................................................................................. 2-2
Server Mode Connection................................................................................................................. 2-2
Client Mode Connection.................................................................................................................. 2-2
VM Proxy Options.................................................................................................................................... 2-3
Using the Command Line Interface ....................................................................................................... 2-4
ams-install.......................................................................................................................................... 2-5
ams-list ............................................................................................................................................... 2-6
ams-info ............................................................................................................................................. 2-7
ams-update........................................................................................................................................ 2-8
ams-remove....................................................................................................................................... 2-9
ams-run ............................................................................................................................................ 2-10
ams-stop........................................................................................................................................... 2-11
blacklist ............................................................................................................................................ 2-11
properties-list .................................................................................................................................. 2-12
get-property..................................................................................................................................... 2-13
set-property ..................................................................................................................................... 2-14
save-properties................................................................................................................................ 2-15
iii
net-info ............................................................................................................................................. 2-16
net-set ............................................................................................................................................... 2-16
net-reconnect................................................................................................................................... 2-17
device-list......................................................................................................................................... 2-18
device-change.................................................................................................................................. 2-18
shutdown......................................................................................................................................... 2-19
cd....................................................................................................................................................... 2-20
delete ................................................................................................................................................ 2-20
get ..................................................................................................................................................... 2-21
ls ........................................................................................................................................................ 2-22
mkdir................................................................................................................................................ 2-22
rmdir................................................................................................................................................. 2-23
pwd................................................................................................................................................... 2-24
put..................................................................................................................................................... 2-24
exit .................................................................................................................................................... 2-25
ks-delete........................................................................................................................................... 2-25
ks-export .......................................................................................................................................... 2-26
ks-import ......................................................................................................................................... 2-26
ks-list ................................................................................................................................................ 2-27
ks-clients .......................................................................................................................................... 2-28
dumpheap ....................................................................................................................................... 2-28
3 Security
Overview of Oracle Java ME Embedded Permissions ........................................................................ 3-1
Accessing Peripherals .............................................................................................................................. 3-4
Signing the Application with API Permissions ........................................................................... 3-4
CLDC Permissions.................................................................................................................................... 3-6
FilePermission................................................................................................................................... 3-6
RuntimePermission.......................................................................................................................... 3-6
LoggingPermission .......................................................................................................................... 3-8
PropertyPermission.......................................................................................................................... 3-8
Keystore Permissions ............................................................................................................................... 3-8
KeyStorePermission ......................................................................................................................... 3-8
Device I/O Permissions........................................................................................................................... 3-9
ADCPermission ................................................................................................................................ 3-9
ATPermission.................................................................................................................................... 3-9
CounterPermission......................................................................................................................... 3-10
DACPermission .............................................................................................................................. 3-10
DeviceMgmtPermission ................................................................................................................ 3-11
GenericPermission ......................................................................................................................... 3-11
GPIOPinPermission ....................................................................................................................... 3-12
GPIOPortPermission...................................................................................................................... 3-12
I2CPermission ................................................................................................................................. 3-13
iv
MMIOPermission ........................................................................................................................... 3-13
PWMPermission ............................................................................................................................. 3-14
SPIPermission ................................................................................................................................. 3-14
UARTPermission............................................................................................................................ 3-14
WatchdogTimerPermission .......................................................................................................... 3-15
Smart Cards ............................................................................................................................................. 3-15
APDUPermission ........................................................................................................................... 3-15
Cellular ..................................................................................................................................................... 3-16
CellularPermission......................................................................................................................... 3-16
Generic Events......................................................................................................................................... 3-16
EventPermission............................................................................................................................. 3-16
COMM Protocol...................................................................................................................................... 3-17
CommProtocolPermission ............................................................................................................ 3-17
Connector................................................................................................................................................. 3-18
CBS.................................................................................................................................................... 3-18
File Read .......................................................................................................................................... 3-18
File Write ......................................................................................................................................... 3-19
RTSP ................................................................................................................................................. 3-19
SMS................................................................................................................................................... 3-20
Datagram Protocol.................................................................................................................................. 3-20
DatagramProtocolPermission....................................................................................................... 3-20
DTLSProtocolPermission .............................................................................................................. 3-21
DTLSServerPermission.................................................................................................................. 3-21
File Protocol ............................................................................................................................................. 3-22
FileProtocolPermission.................................................................................................................. 3-22
Hypertext Transfer Protocols................................................................................................................ 3-22
HTTPProtocolPermission.............................................................................................................. 3-22
HTTPSProtocolPermission............................................................................................................ 3-23
IMC ........................................................................................................................................................... 3-23
IMCProtocolPermission ................................................................................................................ 3-23
Multicast Protocols ................................................................................................................................. 3-24
MulticastProtocolPermission........................................................................................................ 3-24
Push Protocols......................................................................................................................................... 3-25
PushRegistryPermission................................................................................................................ 3-25
Socket Protocols ...................................................................................................................................... 3-26
SocketProtocolPermission............................................................................................................. 3-26
SSLProtocolPermission.................................................................................................................. 3-27
Location.................................................................................................................................................... 3-28
LocationPermission........................................................................................................................ 3-29
Media........................................................................................................................................................ 3-29
RecordControl................................................................................................................................. 3-29
VideoControl................................................................................................................................... 3-29
Auto-Start................................................................................................................................................. 3-29
v
AutoStartPermission...................................................................................................................... 3-29
Power........................................................................................................................................................ 3-29
PowerStatePermission ................................................................................................................... 3-29
Software Management ........................................................................................................................... 3-30
SWMPermission ............................................................................................................................. 3-30
Runtime Update...................................................................................................................................... 3-31
RuntimeUpdatePermission........................................................................................................... 3-31
4 Software Management
SuiteInstallListener Interface................................................................................................................... 4-1
SuiteListener Interface.............................................................................................................................. 4-2
SuiteManager Interface ............................................................................................................................ 4-2
TaskListener Interface .............................................................................................................................. 4-2
TaskManager Interface............................................................................................................................. 4-3
ManagerFactory Class.............................................................................................................................. 4-4
The Suite Class .......................................................................................................................................... 4-4
SuiteInstaller Class.................................................................................................................................... 4-6
SuiteManagementTracker Class ............................................................................................................. 4-6
SWMPermission Class ............................................................................................................................. 4-7
Task Class................................................................................................................................................... 4-7
InstallerErrorCode .................................................................................................................................... 4-8
5 General Purpose Input/Output
Setting a GPIO Output Pin ...................................................................................................................... 5-1
Working with a Breadboard.................................................................................................................... 5-4
Blinking an LED........................................................................................................................................ 5-8
Testing Output and Input Pins ............................................................................................................. 5-10
6 Working with the I2C Bus
Experimenting with a 7-Segment Display ............................................................................................ 6-1
Experimenting with a 16x2 LCD Display.............................................................................................. 6-7
7 The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) Bus
Using the SPI Bus to Communicate with an ADC............................................................................... 7-1
8 Working with Java ME Encryption
Connecting to an SSL Server ................................................................................................................... 8-1
Authenticating an SSL Server ................................................................................................................. 8-4
Accessing the Keystore ............................................................................................................................ 8-6
Configuring the Board as a Secure Server............................................................................................. 8-8
A Java ME Optimization Techniques
Design......................................................................................................................................................... A-1
vi
Memory.............................................................................................................................................. A-1
Threads .............................................................................................................................................. A-1
System Callbacks .............................................................................................................................. A-1
Input/Output ............................................................................................................................................ A-2
General Tips............................................................................................................................................... A-2
Application Size ........................................................................................................................................ A-3
B Java ME Embedded Properties
Modifying the Properties File ................................................................................................................. B-1
Using the Command-Line Interface....................................................................................................... B-1
C Signing an IMlet Suite's JAR File
Instructions for Using JadTool................................................................................................................ C-1
Using the JadTool Utility ......................................................................................................................... C-2
Handling Expired Certificates ................................................................................................................ C-3
Options Summary..................................................................................................................................... C-3
D Managing Keys and Certificates
Running MEKeyTool................................................................................................................................ D-1
Using the MEKeyTool Utility.................................................................................................................. D-2
ME Keystores............................................................................................................................................. D-2
Working Directory for the Emulator ............................................................................................. D-2
Creating and Managing Multiple ME Keystores......................................................................... D-3
Importing a Key ........................................................................................................................................ D-3
Listing Available Keys ............................................................................................................................. D-4
Deleting a Key ........................................................................................................................................... D-5
Replacing a Key......................................................................................................................................... D-6
MEKeyTool Summary.............................................................................................................................. D-6
E OEM Extensions
Using OEM Extensions ............................................................................................................................ E-1
F Encryption Algorithms
Supported Algorithms for Windows, Linux, and Raspberry Pi Platforms...................................... F-1
TLSv1.0 - TLSv1.2 ............................................................................................................................. F-1
Glossary
vii
viii
Preface
This book describes how to create and build Oracle Java ME Embedded software from
its source code.
Audience
This document is intended for developers who want to build Oracle Java ME
Embedded software for embedded devices.
Related Documents
For a complete list of documents with the Oracle Java ME Embedded software, see the
Release Notes.
Operating System Commands
This document does not contain information on basic commands and procedures such
as opening a terminal window, changing directories, and setting environment
variables. See the software documentation that you received with your system for this
information.
Shell Prompts
Shell Prompt
Bourne shell $
Windows directory>
Conventions
The following text conventions are used in this document:
Convention Meaning
boldface Boldface type indicates graphical user interface elements associated
with an action, or terms defined in text or the glossary.
italic Italic type indicates book titles, emphasis, or placeholder variables for
which you supply particular values.
ix
Convention Meaning
monospace Monospace type indicates commands within a paragraph, URLs, code
in examples, text that appears on the screen, or text that you enter.
x
1
Developer Migration Guide
Learn the changes between version 3.4 of the Oracle Java ME Embedded and the
current instance, version 8.3 , if you need to port earlier applications to the latest
version of the Oracle Java ME Embedded runtime. You can safely skip this chapter, if
you have not developed IMlets using version 3.4 or earlier of the Oracle Java ME
Embedded platform.
Topics:
• Overview
• Modified Permission Model
• Device I/O Namespace
• Generic Connection Framework Changes
Overview
Java ME 8 is an umbrella terms for two new JSRs: CLDC 8 and MEEP 8. CLDC 8 is a
major evolution of CLDC 1.1, while MEEP 8 is a major evolution of IMP-NG. Java ME
8 also includes support for the new Device I/O API.
CLDC 8 is backwards compatible with CLDC 1.1, but includes alignment with the Java
SE 7 and 8 language, core APIs, and VM functionality, Java SE-style class-based finegrain permissions, as well as a significantly enhanced Generic Connection Framework
(GCF).
MEEP 8 allows execution of most IMP-NG applications, and includes significant
enhancements by leveraging the CLDC 8 features, improvements in the application
platform, improved software provisioning and management, footprint scalability
through optional APIs, improved connectivity options, and more flexible
authentication and authorization mechanisms.
The Device I/O API defines an API that allows Java applications running on small
embedded devices to access peripheral devices, from a peripheral device external to
the host device to a peripheral chip embedded in the host device.
It is strongly recommended that developers familiarize themselves with the CLDC 8
specification and API, the MEEP 8 specification and API, and the Device I/O API.
Modified Permission Model
There are a number of new permissions that object methods must obtain before they
can successfully access peripherals. These permissions are covered in more detail in
Chapter 2. However, developers should be aware of the following:
• Java ME 8 now uses Java SE-style class-based fine-grain permissions.
Developer Migration Guide 1-1
• Applications should request the jdk.dio.DeviceMgmtPermission permission
when accessing any devices connected to the board through protocols such as
GPIO, I2C, SPI, or MMIO, in addition to the permissions required by the
communication bus they are using.
• The syntax for the permissions request has changed. The request now includes the
device identifier and any specific actions that are requested, if applicable. Device
identifiers (e.g., GPIO7, SPI) are listed in the appropriate appendix of the Getting
Started Guide for that development board.
• A single request cannot be used for multiple devices; each permissions must be
listed separately. For example, you cannot do the following:
MIDlet-Permission-1: jdk.dio.GPIOPinPermission "GPIO7,GPIO8" "open"
Instead, you must do this:
MIDlet-Permission-1: jdk.dio.GPIOPinPermission "GPIO7" "open"
MIDlet-Permission-2: jdk.dio.GPIOPinPermission "GPIO8" "open"
In some cases, you can use an asterisk as a wildcard.
Device I/O Namespace
The Device Access API of the Oracle Java ME Embedded platform is now referred to
as the Device I/O API, and is no longer part of the com.oracle.deviceaccess
package. Instead, all classes now use the jdk.dio namespace. In addition:
• Classes that contain "Peripheral" have been changed to "Device." So, for example,
PeripheralManager has been replaced by DeviceManager, and
PeripheralPermission has been replaced by DevicePermission.
• Support now exists for pulse width modulation (PWM) on all platforms.
• Almost all of the individual class methods are unchanged.
Generic Connection Framework Changes
The IMP-NG javax.microedition classes are now replaced by the Generic
Connection Framework (GCF) with JSR-360 and Java ME Embedded Profile classes
(MEEP) with JSR-361. There are a large number of changes that are included in these
new profiles. See the specification pages online for more information on each of these
classes.
Device I/O Namespace
1-2 Developer’s Guide
2
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console
Starting from version 8, the Oracle Java ME Embedded software moves as much CPU
intensive processing away from the embedded Java VM as possible. Instead, a
separate application running on the host side interacts across the network with the
internals of the Java VM. With this design, the VM only sends low-level events to the
host application, such as state change information, methods transition, and objects
information.
The information is then stored and analyzed on host side, and the host application in
turn provides the information to all external profilers, monitors, and managers.
External tools can treat the Java SE host application as if it was the VM itself. Besides
performance and footprint goals, this approach minimizes development efforts on
porting different component communications to new physical transport such as USB,
serial, or Bluetooth. Instead, this VM proxy application (also known as the Developer
Agent) and the VM proxy channel becomes the inter-component tool, and Javacall,
CLDC, MEEP, JSRs and SDK components can all take advantage of it.
Topics:
• Design
• Starting the VM Proxy on the Desktop
• VM Proxy Options
• Using the Command Line Interface
Design
The VM proxy uses a single transport connection to transmit all data for any
subsystem. See Figure 2-1 for an illustration of this design; the VM proxy is the middle
component.
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-1
Figure 2-1 VM Proxy and Agent Design for Java Embedded
Be sure not to confuse the VM proxy with the VM agent. The VM agent consists of
native code and is located on the embedded device. The VM proxy is written in Java
SE and is launched on the desktop host.
The proxy also provides a software management (SWM) API, similar to the
javax.microedition.swm package, as declared in the Java ME Embedded Profile
(MEEP) specification. This API is an extension of the previous Application
Management System (AMS) API of previous versions of the Oracle Java ME
Embedded platform, and can be leveraged by ME SDK, IDEs, and the CLI to manage
applications with any connected device.
The transport layer between the VM proxy (desktop) and the VM agent (device) is
protocol-agnostic by design. However, it is currently implemented for TCP, Serial
(COM port), and USB. The transport can initiate connection establishment in any
direction, either from device to host or vise versa.
Starting the VM Proxy on the Desktop
To use the VM Proxy, extract the files from your copy of the Oracle Java ME
Embedded ZIP archive on the Windows desktop. The VM Proxy program is found as
a JAR file inside the util directory of the Oracle Java ME Embedded distribution,
named proxy.jar. You can start the VM Proxy on the desktop host computer either
in a server or a client mode as described below.
Server Mode Connection
The server mode is used by default. In this mode, the VM Proxy must be started after
the Java runtime is started on the embedded board. Then do the following.
1. Change to the util directory on your desktop host and enter the following
command. You should see an output similar to the following:
C:\mydir\util> java -jar proxy.jar -socket <Raspberry Pi IP Address>
Channel 8 CLOSED -> AVAILABLE
Trying to open socket connection with device: <IP Address>:2201
Connected to the socket Socket[addr=/<IP address>, port 2201, localport=54784]
Debugger Connection initialized
Client Mode Connection
To switch to a client mode connection, perform the following steps.
Starting the VM Proxy on the Desktop
2-2 Developer’s Guide
1. Edit the jwc_properties.ini file on the embedded board as follows:
• Set the proxy.connection_mode property to the client value.
• Set the proxy.client_connection_address property to the IP address of
the host running the Developer Agent.
2. Start the Java runtime on the embedded board.
3. Change to the lib directory on your desktop host and enter the following
command. You should see an output similar to the following:
C:\mydir\util> java -jar proxy.jar
Starting with default parameters: -ServerSocketPort 2200 -jdbport 2801
Channel 8 CLOSED -> AVAILABLE
Waiting for device connections on port 2200
By default, the proxy listens for CLI connections at 65002 port on the host. The port
can be changed by passing the -cliport option while launching the proxy.
VM Proxy Options
The following options are available when starting the VM Proxy using the java -jar
proxy.jar command.
no options - runs proxy with default transport. The host opens a server socket and
waits for a connection from the embedded device. This means the Java Embedded
runtime should be started on the device with its jwc_properties.ini file
containing the following settings:
proxy.connection_mode=client
proxy.client_conncetion_address=(IP address of VM Proxy)
-socket <IpAddress> - runs the proxy as a client. This means that the device should
open a server socket and wait for a connection from the host. The Java Embedded
runtime should be started on the device with its jwc_properties.ini file
containing the following setting:
proxy.connection_mode=server
-serial <COM_PORT> – Runs the proxy with a serial transport. This means that the
VM proxy communicates with device across the specified serial port.
-debug – Adds additional debugging information when the VM proxy is running.
-i – Runs CLI in the command shell proxy in interactive mode.
-cliAcceptAnyHost – Accepts connections to CLI from any host. By default, only
localhost connections are accepted.
-proxyhost <HOST ADDRESS>– Specifies the HTTP proxy address for outbound IP
connections from the proxy.
-proxyport <PROXY PORT> – Specifies the HTTP proxy port for outbound IP
connections from the proxy.
Use the -help proxy option to preview the list of the available options.
VM Proxy Options
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-3
Using the Command Line Interface
Once the VM proxy is running on the desktop, you can use the AMS CLI. The easiest
way to do this is to start a PuTTY executable on your desktop computer, and connect
to localhost at port 65002. This is shown in Figure 2-1. See the appropriate Getting
Started Guide for your embedded board for platform-specific information on using the
Command Line Interface.
Figure 2-2 PuTTY Configuration
The window from port 65002 provides a command-line interface (CLI), and is shown
in Figure 2-2:
Using the Command Line Interface
2-4 Developer’s Guide
Figure 2-3 Command-Line Interface
Warning:
The command-line interface (CLI) feature in this Oracle Java ME Embedded
software release is provided only as a concept for your reference. It uses
insecure connections with no encryption, authentication, or authorization.
The following CLI commands are available for developers. When a command is only
available for a specific embedded platform, it is shown in the description.
ams-install
Installs IMlets on the embedded device.
Usage
ams-install <URL> [auth=<username>:<password>] [hostdownload]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<URL> Specifies the JAD/JAR location. The URL may contain credentials to access
the JAD/JAR server (e.g. http://username:password@host/...).
hostdownload Downloads the JAR file using HTTP and then installs it to device via the
tooling channel. Applicable for JAR files only.
auth Specifies the user credentials to access the JAD/JAR server.
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-5
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ams-install,start install, <URL> Information message about
the start of the installation
process.
<<ams-install, install status: stage
<stage> , %percentage%
Information message about
the installation progress
<<ams-install, OK,install success Information message about
the installation completing.
<<ams-install,FAIL,missing parameters.
see help.
The URL is not specified.
<<ams-install,ERROR,unknown
parameter: '<dummy parameter'. see help.
An unexpected parameter
was found. One or more
parameters were found two
or more times.
<<ams-install,FAIL,credentials must be
specified once: in url or in auth parameter
Credential info specified
twice: in <URL> and in
<auth> parameter.
<<ams-install,FAIL,can't download jar
data from <URL>
An error occurred while
downloading the JAR in
hostdownload mode.
<<ams-install,FAIL,errorCode errorcode,
errorMessage : message
Installation was aborted for
some reason, described in
error message.
<<ams-install,FAIL, error occurred
exception
An unexpected error
occurred. Note that this
response is added for
debugging purposes and to
avoid confusion.
ams-list
Shows a list of installed IMlets on the device or in the specified suite. If no arguments
are specified, the ams-list command will return a list of all installed suites. If a
suite's index or name/vendor combination are used, the command will list the suite's
midlets.
Usage
ams-list [<index> or <name>|<vendor>]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<index> Specifies the suite via its index number.
Using the Command Line Interface
2-6 Developer’s Guide
Parameter Description
<name>|<vendor> Specified the suite via its name and vendor
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ams-list,FAIL,invalid parameters Unexpected parameters were
found
<<ams-list,OK,0 suites are installed No suites were found on the
device
<<ams-list,0.name|vendor,status
...
<<ams-list,N.name|vendor,status
<<ams-list,OK,N suites are installed
List of installed suites with
details
<<ams-list,FAIL,invalid parameter Parsing the suite's index
failed or the | character was
missed
<<ams-list,FAIL,not found The suite was not found
<<ams-list,1.midlet,status
...
<<ams-list,N.midlet,status
<<ams-list,OK,N midlets are installed in
suiteName|suiteVendor
List of the installed midlets in
the suite. Note that each suite
status can be RUNNING or
STOPPED.
ams-info
Displays information regarding the specified suite.
Usage
ams-info <index>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<index> Specifies the suite via its index number.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ams-info,FAIL,missing parameters. see
help.
Number of the specified
parameters is less or more
than 1.
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-7
Response Description
<<ams-info,FAIL,connection is closed Connection to the device is
closed
<<ams-info,FAIL,not found The suite is not found or
removed during command
execution.
<<ams-info,SIZE=<size>
<<ams-info,VERSION=<version>
<<ams-info,NAME=<name>
<<ams-info,VENDOR=<vendor>
<<ams-info,URL=<URL>
<<ams-info,MIDlet-1=<midlet-1>
<<ams-info,OK,success getting info
List of suite-specific
information.
ams-update
Updates the specified suite.
Usage
ams-update <index> or <name|vendor> [auth=<username>[:<password>]]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<index> The index of the suite to be updated. To obtain the
suite index, use the ams-list command.
<name>|<vendor> Specifies the suite to be updated via its name and
vendor.
auth Specifies the user credentials to access the JAD/JAR
server.
Note: The suite's <index> or <name|vendor> combination is mandatory and must be
placed first.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ams-update,FAIL,missing parameters.
see help.
Missing parameters (the
suite's index or name|vendor
combination is not specified)
<<ams-update,ERROR,unknown
parameter: parameter. see help.
An unexpected parameter
was found.
<<ams-update,ERROR,duplicate
parameter: parameter. see help.
A duplicate parameter was
found
Using the Command Line Interface
2-8 Developer’s Guide
Response Description
<<ams-update,ERROR,Can't update suite
suiteIndex (suiteName|suiteVendor):
download url is not specified.
The download URL is not
specified. For suites, installed
in hostdownload mode, see
the ams-install command.
<<ams-update,FAIL,not found Suite not found. Either the
suite was removed or the
index / name|vendor
identifier was specified
incorrectly.
<<ams-update,start install, <URL> Information message about
the update process starting.
<<ams-update, install status: stage stage ,
percentage%
Information message about
the update progress
<<ams-update, OK,install success Information message about
the update process
completing.
<<ams-update,FAIL, errorCode errorcode,
errorMessage : message
The update was aborted for
some reason, as described in
the error message.
<<ams-update,FAIL, error occurred
exception
An unexpected error
occurred. Note that this
response is added for
debugging purposes and to
avoid confusion.
ams-remove
Removes the specified suite from device.
Usage
ams-remove <index or name|vendor>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<index> The index of the suite to be removed. To obtain the
suite index, use the ams-list command.
<name>|<vendor> Specifies the suite to be removed via its name and
vendor
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-9
Response Description
<<ams-update,FAIL,missing parameters.
see help.
Missing parameters (suite's
index or name|vendor not
specified)
<<ams-remove,OK,removed The suite was successfully
removed:
<<ams-remove,FAIL,not found The suite was not found.
Either the suite has been
already removed, or the
<index>/<name|vendor>
identifier was specified
incorrectly.
<<ams-remove,FAIL,locked The suite is locked and cannot
be removed. The suite is
likely in the RUNNING state.
The ams-stop command
must be called first.
<<ams-remove,FAIL,not allowed The user doesn't have
permissions to remove suites.
ams-run
Run default suite's MIDlet or MIDlet, specified wit [MILET_ID] parameter
Usage
ams-run <index or name|vendor> [<id>]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<index> Index of suite to be run. To obtain the suite index,
use the ams-list command.
<name>|<vendor> Specifies the suite to be launched via its name and
vendor
<id> The index of midlet in the suite to be run.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ams-run,FAIL,invalid parameters Unexpected parameters were
found.
<<ams-run,FAIL,failed to start Cannot start the midlet. The
index of the suite or midlet
was specified incorrectly.
Using the Command Line Interface
2-10 Developer’s Guide
Response Description
<<ams-run,FAIL,already started The suite has been already
started.
<<ams-run,OK,started The suite was started
successfully.
ams-stop
Stops the default MIDlet, or the MIDlet with the specified ID if given.
Usage
ams-stop <index or name|vendor> [id]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<index> Index of suite to be stopped. To obtain the suite
index, use the ams-list command.
<name>|<vendor> Specified the suite to be stopped via its name and
vendor
<id> The ID of midlet in the suite to be stopped.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ams-stop,FAIL,invalid parameters Unexpected parameters were
found
<<ams-stop,FAIL,not found Cannot stop the midlet. The
index of the suite or midlet
was specified incorrectly.
<<ams-stop,OK,started The suite was stopped
successfully
blacklist
Blacklists clients and applications.
Usage
blacklist -client <name>
blacklist -app <name|vendor>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-11
Parameter Description
<name> The name of the client to be blacklist.
<name>|<vendor> Specifies the suite to be blacklisted via its name and
vendor
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<blacklist,FAIL,invalid parameters Unexpected parameters were
found
<<blacklist status OK The command was successful.
properties-list
Shows the list of names of properties which control Java ME runtime, common to the
java_properties.ini file. Note that a property type may be only INT, STRING or
BOOL. The read/write flag value may be only read/write or read only, and a BOOL
property value may be only true or false.
Usage
properties-list [-l]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
-l Use the long listing format with properties' types,
values and readonly flags.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<propertieslist,AMS_MEMORY_LIMIT_MVM
AMS_MEMORY_RESERVED_MVM
AuthenticationName AuthenticationPwd
btgoep btl2cap btspp cbs ...
The response without the
long listing flag. Shows
property names separated by
a space.
Using the Command Line Interface
2-12 Developer’s Guide
Response Description
<<properties-list,OK
read/write INT
AMS_MEMORY_LIMIT_MVM = -1
read/write INT
AMS_MEMORY_RESERVED_MVM = 100
read/write STRING AuthenticationName
= user
read/write STRING AuthenticationPwd =
password
read only BOOL
microedition.deviceid.isunique = false
read only BOOL
microedition.devicevendor.isunique =
false
The response with the long
listing flag.
<<properties-list,FAIL,invalid parameters
<<properties-list,Usage: properties-list [-l]
<<properties-list,list of properties which
control Java ME runtime
<<properties-list, -l use a long listing
format
An unexpected parameter
was found
<<properties-list,OK,there is no property
found
An empty list of properties
was found.
<<properties-list,FAIL,connection is
closed
An IOException has
occurred.
get-property
Shows the value of requested property. If the property is not defined, the command
shows an empty string as its value.
Usage
get-property <name> [-i]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
name The property name
-i Displays additional property information
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<get-property,OK,dio.counter = true The property was found
(without displaying
additional information)
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-13
Response Description
<<get-property,OK,dummy.property = The property value is empty
or not a set (without
additional information)
<<get-property,OK, readonly BOOL
dio.counter = true
The property is found (with -
i flag)
<<get-property,OK, read/write STRING
dummy-property =
The property value is empty
or not a set (with -i flag)
<<get-property,FAIL,illegal argument
[ip.netmask]
<<get-property,Usage: get-property name
[-i]
<<get-property,shows value of string
property 'name'
<<get-property, -i display property info
An unexpected parameter
was found
The wrong flag format was
used(e.g. using -info
instead of -i)
<<get-property,FAIL,connection is closed An IOException has
occurred.
<<get-property,OK,LC_NETWORK = 2 =>
1
The property was modified
with the set-property
command. The new value
will be effective after you
restart the device.
set-property
Sets the new value for the requested property. If the property controls the Java ME
Runtime (i.e., it is defined in the java_properties.ini file), it cannot be rewritten
unless the read-only flag is disabled. Note that properties are verified for type
correctness. The value of a BOOL property may be any string. However, only "true"
(case insensitive) is considered a true value; any other string is considered to be false.
The new value for a property that controls the Java ME Runtime will be applied only
after a VM reboot. In this case, only the latest set-property command will have an
effect after reboot. New values for other properties can be read just after the getproperty command has finished.
Usage
set-property <name> <value>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<name> The name of the requested property
<value> The new value for the property.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Using the Command Line Interface
2-14 Developer’s Guide
Response Description
<<set-property,OK,imc = new.value The operation completed
successfully.
<<set-property,FAIL,illegal number
[hello].
The value type is not a
number when property type
is INT:
<<set-property,FAIL,illegal argument
[microedition.devicevendor.isunique] or
[true].
The property is read-only:
<<set-property,FAIL,invalid parameters. Wrong number of
parameters:
<<set-property,FAIL,connection is closed An IOException has
occurred
When you modify a property by using the set-property command and verify the
change with the get-property command, the CLI response contains both old and
new values as shown in the following example. The new value will be effective after
you restart the device.
10.162.80.150:2201>>get-property LC_NETWORK
<<get-property,OK,LC_NETWORK = 2
10.162.80.150:2201>>set-property LC_NETWORK 1
<<set-property,OK,LC_NETWORK = 1
Changes will take effect after device restart
10.162.80.150:2201>>get-property LC_NETWORK
<<get-property,OK,LC_NETWORK = 2 => 1
save-properties
Saves properties to an internal storage.
Usage
save-properties
Parameters
This command takes no parameters:
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<save-properties,OK,success Properties have been
successfully saved to the
internal storage
<<save-properties,FAIL An IOException has
occurred.
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-15
net-info
Show the network information of the system. This command only works on
Qualcomm IoE devices.
Usage
net-info
Parameters
This command takes no parameters:
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<net-info,OK,success getting info Shows network information
in the format <name>=<value>
<<net-info,FAIL, connection is closed An IOException has
occurred.
net-set
Sets a new value for the requested property of the network system. The property is
verified for type correctness. This command only works on Qualcomm IoE devices.
Usage
net-set <name> <value>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<name> The name of the requested property
<value> The new value for the property.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<net-set,OK,<NAME> = <VALUE> The operation completed
successfully.
Using the Command Line Interface
2-16 Developer’s Guide
Response Description
<<net-set,FAIL,illegal first argument
[<NAME>]
<<net-set ssid <SSID>:set value for WIFI
access
<<net-set passwd <PASSWD>:set
password for WIFI access
<<net-set pref <0|1|2|3|4|5>:set network
mode preference 0:AUTO, 1:NO OP,
2:WLAN Only, 3:GSM/WCDMA only,
4:WCDMA only, 5:GSM/WCDMA/WLAN
<<net-set apn <APN>:set APN
<<net-set pdp_authtype <0|1|2>:set
APN's auth type 0:NONE, 1:PAP, 2:CHAP
<<net-set pdp_username
<USERNAME>:set pdp username
<<net-set pdp_password
<PASSWORD>:set pdp password
An illegal type of property
was encountered. The
response dictates the correct
syntax and property type.
<<net-set,FAIL,illegal value [<VALUE>] The value type was not a
number when the property
type is INT.
<<net-set,FAIL,illegal argument
[<NAME>] or [<VALUE>]
This is returned if any of
arguments are null or if the
property.name has an
incorrect property type.
<<net-set,FAIL,connection is closed An IOException has
occurred.
net-reconnect
Reconnects the network and reboots Java.
Usage
net-reconnect
Parameters
This command takes no parameters:
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<net-reconnect,OK,VM will reboot.
Device will reconnect to the network
The network reconnect
command completed
successfully. The device will
be rebooted and reconnected
to the network.
<<net-reconnect,FAIL Cannot reconnect the device
to the network
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-17
Response Description
<<net-reconnect,FAIL, connection is closed An IOException has
occurred.
device-list
Prints a list of all connected devices at the current time.
Usage
device-list
Parameters
This command takes no parameters.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
< <<device-list,
0,<IP0>:<port0>,CURRENT<<device-list,
1,<IP1>:<port1>...<<devicelist,<N-1>,<IPN-1>:<portN-1><<devicelist,OK,N devices are connected
Printed list of devices. The
"CURRENT" annotation
indicates the currently seleted
device that all device-related
CLI command are addressed
to.
<<device-list,FAIL,invalid parameters Unexpected parameters were
found. In this case, the
command has no parameters,
but the user has specified
some:
device-change
Switches the currently-selected device. Once changed, all further device-related
commands will be address to the newly selected device.
Usage
device-change <index>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<index> An integer index of device, as printed by the
device-list command.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Using the Command Line Interface
2-18 Developer’s Guide
Response Description
<<device-change,OK,current device is
changed
The command has been
processed successfully; the
current device was changed.
<<device-change,FAIL,invalid parameters An invalid number of
parameters have been
specified (either no
parameters or more than one
parameter).
<<device-change,FAIL,incorrect device
index
The index is not an integer.
<<device-change,FAIL,device not found There is no such device.
<<device-change,FAIL,the device is
already current
An attempt was made to
switch to a device that is
already the current device.
shutdown
Shutdown or restart the device.
Usage
shutdown [-r]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
-r Restart the device. Note that restart is not
supported on Win32 platform.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<shutdown,OK,device will shutdown! The shutdown command
was processed successfully.
The device will be shutdown
soon.
<<shutdown,OK,device will reboot! The shutdown command
was processed successfully,
device will be restarted soon.
<<shutdown,FAIL,can't reboot device Cannot restart the device
<<shutdown,FAIL,wrong parameters. see
help.
Unexpected parameters were
found.
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-19
Response Description
<<shutdown,FAIL,<Error message> Shutdown command failed
due an unknown reason.
cd
Changes the working directory on the device.
Usage
cd <deviceDirectoryName>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<deviceDirectoryName
>
This specifies the directory on the device to which
you want to change. The <deviceDirectoryName> can
be relative to the current working directory, or an
absolute path
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<cd,OK The command completed
successfully
<<cd,FAIL,invalid parameters Missing or excess parameters
were encountered
<<cd,FAIL,directory not found
<deviceDirectoryName>
Incorrect
<deviceDirectoryName>
specified
<<cd,FAIL,connection is closed An IOException has
occurred
delete
Deletes file on the device.
Usage
delete <deviceFileName>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Using the Command Line Interface
2-20 Developer’s Guide
Parameter Description
<deviceFileName> Specifies the file to delete. <deviceFileName> can be
relative to the current working directory, or an
absolute path.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<delete,OK The command completed
successfully
<<delete,FAIL,invalid parameters Missing or excess parameters
were encountered.
<<delete,FAIL,file not found
<deviceFileName>
Incorrect <deviceFileName>
specified
<<delete,FAIL,connection is
closed
An IOException has
occurred
get
Copies a device file to the host.
Usage
get <deviceFileName> <hostFileName>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<deviceFileName> Specifies the file to copy. <deviceFileName> can be
relative to the current working directory, or an
absolute path.
<hostFileName> Specifies the name of the file to use on the host.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<get,OK The command completed
successfully
<<get,FAIL,invalid parameters Missing or excess parameters
were encountered
<<get,FAIL,file not found
<deviceFileName>
Incorrect <deviceFileName>
specified
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-21
Response Description
<<get,FAIL,unable to write into file
<hostFileName>
Incorrect <hostFileName>
specified
<<get,FAIL,connection is closed An IOException has
occurred
ls
Displays a list of files and subdirectories in a device directory.
Usage
ls [<deviceDirectoryName>]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<deviceDirectoryName
>
Specifies the directory for which you want to see a
listing. <deviceDirectoryName> can be relative to the
current working directory, or an absolute path. If
no directory is specified, the current working
directory on the device is used. In the result listing,
subdirectories are marked by a trailing device file
separator symbol (for example, "\" on Windows,
"/" on RPi).
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ls,OK
alljavalist.txt
all_classes.zip
appdb\
bin\
classes\
classes.zip
The command completed
successfully
<<ls,FAIL,invalid parameters Excess or invalid parameters
were encountered
<<ls,FAIL,directory not found
<deviceDirectoryName>
Incorrect
<deviceDirectoryName>
specified
mkdir
Creates a directory on the device.
Using the Command Line Interface
2-22 Developer’s Guide
Usage
mkdir <deviceDirectoryName>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<deviceDirectoryName
>
Specifies the name of the new device directory.
<deviceDirectoryName> can be relative to the current
working directory, or an absolute path.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<mkdir,OK The command completed
successfully
<<mkdir,FAIL,invalid parameters Missing or excess parameters
were encountered
<<mkdir,FAIL,directory not found
<deviceDirectoryName>
Incorrect
<deviceDirectoryName> was
specified
<<mkdir,FAIL,connection is closed An IOException has
occurred
rmdir
Deletes an empty directory on the device.
Usage
rmdir <deviceDirectoryName>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<deviceDirectoryName
>
Specifies the name of the device directory to delete.
<deviceDirectoryName> can be relative to the current
working directory, or an absolute path.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<mkdir,OK The command completed
successfully
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-23
Response Description
<<rmdir,FAIL,invalid parameters> Missing or excess parameters
were encountered
<<rmdir,FAIL,directory not found
<deviceDirectoryName>
Incorrect
<deviceDirectoryName> was
specified
<<rmdir,FAIL,unable to delete directory
<deviceDirectoryName>
Unable to delete the
directory, for example, the
directory or a file in it is used
by another application, or the
directory is not empty.
pwd
Prints the current working directory on the device.
Usage
pwd
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<pwd,OK
c:\Users\abc\javame-sdk\8.0_ea\work
\EmbeddedDevice1\appdb
The command processed
successfully
<<pwd,FAIL,invalid parameters Excess parameters were
encountered
put
Copies a local host file to the device.
Usage
put <hostFileName> <deviceFileName>
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<hostFileName> Specifies the local host file to copy.
<deviceFileName> Specifies the name to use on the device.
<deviceFileName> can be relative to the current
working directory, or an absolute path.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Using the Command Line Interface
2-24 Developer’s Guide
Response Description
<<put,OK The command processed
successfully
<<put,FAIL,invalid parameters Missing or excess parameters
<<put,FAIL,unable to read file
<hostFileName>
Incorrect <hostFileName>
specified
<<put,FAIL,file not found
<deviceFileName>
Incorrect <deviceFileName>
specified
<<put,FAIL,connection is closed An IOException has
occurred
exit
Terminates the current CLI session. The CLI server continues to run and the user can
re-connect again.
Usage
exit
Parameters
The command has no parameters.
Responses
The command returns no response; the terminal application closes.
ks-delete
Deletes a key from the ME device keystore, identified either by its owner or the key
number.
Usage
ks-delete (-owner <ownerName> | -number <keyNumber>) [ (-client <name> |
-proxy) ]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<ownerName> The name of the owner of an ME key.
<keyNumber> The key number (starting at 1) of an ME key
currently in the device keystore.
<name> The name of the target security client.
-proxy Drop the proxy connection security in the next
session.
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-25
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ks-delete,OK The command processed
successfully
<<ks-delete,FAIL,bad command or
missing parameters. Type help for
assistance.
An error occurred, either with
the command itself or one of
the parameters.
ks-export
Exports a key from the device keystore identified by its index.
Usage
ks-export -number <keyNumber> -out <filename> [-client <name>]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<keyNumber> The key number (starting at 1) of an ME key
currently in the device keystore.
<filename> The complete filename to save the exported key as.
<name> The name of the target security client.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ks-export,OK The command processed
successfully
<<ks-export,FAIL,bad command or
missing parameters. Type help for
assistance.
An error occurred, either with
the command itself or one of
the parameters.
ks-import
Imports a public key from a JCE keystore or a key file into a ME device keystore.
Usage
ks-import [-keystore <filename>] [-storepass <storepass>] [-keypass
<keypass>] [-alias <keyAlias>] [-client <ClientName>] [-proxy]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Using the Command Line Interface
2-26 Developer’s Guide
Parameter Description
<filename> The complete filename of the JCE keystore or the
key file. The keystore file may be in the following
formats: jks, pkcs12,pem,der
<storepass> The password for the JCA keystore This parameter
is not required when the source file is in the pem or
der format.
<keypass> The password for the private key in a JCA or
PKCS12 keystore. This parameter is not required if
the command is importing only a public certificate.
<keyAlias> The short string ID of a key in a JCA keystore. This
parameter is not required when the source file is in
the pem or der format.
<clientName> The name of the security domain client. If specified,
the certificate will be added to the indicated client
only.
-proxy Enforces the proxy connection security (TLS 1.2)
with the given certificate, starting from the next
session.
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ks-import,OK The command processed
successfully
<<ks-import,FAIL,bad command or
missing parameters. Type help for
assistance.
An error occurred, either with
the command itself or one of
the parameters.
ks-list
Lists the owner and validity period of each key in the ME device keystore.
Usage
ks-list [(-proxy | -client <name>)]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
<name> The name of the target security client.
-proxy Displays the certificate(s) installed for securing the
proxy connection.
Using the Command Line Interface
Java Embedded VM Proxy and Console 2-27
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ks-list [<number>]=Owner:<Owner
distinguished name> Valid from <date> to
<date>
A list of each of the installed
keys, following this format.
ks-clients
Presents a list of all the security clients defined in the system that can accept public
keys.
Usage
ks-clients
Responses
This command may return the following responses:
Response Description
<<ks-list [<number>]=<Client name> A list of each of the clients,
following this format.
dumpheap
Dumps Java heap of the connected device.
Usage
dumpheap [-gc]
Parameters
This command takes the following parameters:
Parameter Description
[-gc] Forces full garbage collector (GC) on the device
prior the dump.
Using the Command Line Interface
2-28 Developer’s Guide
3
Security
This chapter discusses security with the Oracle Java ME Embedded environment. Note
that with version 8 of the OJMEE, the security system was changed considerably, and
now uses Java SE-style fine-grain permissions. In addition, a security policy must be
chosen and JAR files, if applicable, must be digitally signed in order for peripherals to
be accessed.
Overview of Oracle Java ME Embedded Permissions
Applications that require access to peripherals or resources must request appropriate
permissions in the JAD file. For more information on using the Device I/O APIs,
please see the Device I/O API 1.1 specification and the associated Javadocs at the
following site:
http://docs.oracle.com/javame
Table 3-1 gives a list of all permissions that can be requested in the Oracle Java ME
Embedded environment, as well as a description of when they are applicable.
Table 3-1 Oracle Java ME Embedded Permissions
Permission Description
com.oracle.crypto.keystore.KeyStorePermi
ssion
Allows access to the keystore
com.oracle.ssl.DTLSServerPermission Allows access to a DTLS server.
com.oracle.runtime.update.RuntimeUpdateP
ermission
Allows remote update of the Java
ME Embedded runtime.
java.io.FilePermission Accessing files
java.lang.RuntimePermission Accessing runtime properties
java.util.logging.LoggingPermission Use of log files
java.util.PropertyPermission Accessing system properties
javax.microedition.apdu.APDUPermission Access to smartcards using the
APDU protocol
javax.microedition.cellular.CellularPerm
ission
Use of cellular telephone
functionality on a board.
javax.microedition.event.EventPermission Reading and posting system-level
events
javax.microedition.io.AccessPointPermiss
ion
Use of access points for network
connections.
Security 3-1
Table 3-1 (Cont.) Oracle Java ME Embedded Permissions
Permission Description
javax.microedition.io.CommProtocolPermis
sion
Use of the COMM serial port
protocol
javax.microedition.io.Connector.cbs Use of a Cell Broadcast Service (CBS)
Connector
javax.microedition.io.Connector.file.rea
d
Use of a file read Connector
javax.microedition.io.Connector.file.wri
te
Use of a file write Connector
javax.microedition.io.Connector.rtsp Use of a real-time streaming
protocol (RTSP) Connector
javax.microedition.io.Connector.sms Use of an SMS Connector
javax.microedition.io.DatagramProtocolPe
rmission
Use of the datagram protocol
javax.microedition.io.DTLSProtocolPermis
sion
Use of the Datagram Transport
Layer Security (DTLS) protocol
javax.microedition.io.FileProtocolPermis
sion
Use of a file protocol
javax.microedition.io.HttpProtocolPermis
sion
Use of the HTTP protocol
javax.microedition.io.HttpsProtocolPermi
ssion
Use of the HTTPS protocol
javax.microedition.io.IMCProtocolPermiss
ion
Use of the Inter-MIDlet
communication protocol
javax.microedition.io.MulticastProtocolP
ermission
Use of a multicast protocol
javax.microedition.io.PushRegistryPermis
sion
Use of a push registry
javax.microedition.io.SocketProtocolPerm
ission
Use of a socket protocol
javax.microedition.io.SSLProtocolPermiss
ion
Use of the Secure Sockets Layer
(SSL) protocol
javax.microedition.location.LocationPerm
ission
Obtain the current location
javax.microedition.media.control.RecordC
ontrol
Use of a recording feature on the
device
javax.microedition.media.control.VideoCo
ntrol.getSnapshot
Use of a video snapshot feature on
the device
Overview of Oracle Java ME Embedded Permissions
3-2 Developer’s Guide
Table 3-1 (Cont.) Oracle Java ME Embedded Permissions
Permission Description
javax.microedition.midlet.AutoStartPermi
ssion
A permission to autostart an IMlet
suite on a device
javax.microedition.power.PowerStatePermi
ssion
Access the current power state of the
device
javax.microedition.swm.SWMPermission Access the software management
features of the Java ME Embedded
runtime
javax.wireless.messaging.cbs.receive Receive a Cell Broadcast Service
(CBS) message
javax.wireless.messaging.sms.receive Receive an SMS message
javax.wireless.messaging.sms.send Send an SMS message
jdk.dio.adc.ADCPermission Use of analog-to-digital converter
(ADC)
jdk.dio.atcmd.ATPermission Use of AT communication line
jdk.dio.counter.CounterPermission Use of the hardware counter
jdk.dio.dac.DACPermission Use of digital-to-analog converter
(DAC)
jdk.dio.DeviceMgmtPermission Opening of any Device I/O
peripheral.
jdk.dio.generic.GenericPermission Use of generic Device I/O
connections
jdk.dio.gpio.GPIOPinPermission Use of a General Purpose I/O
(GPIO) pin
jdk.dio.gpio.GPIOPortPermission Use of a General Purpose I/O
(GPIO) port
jdk.dio.i2cbus.I2CPermission Use of the I2C bus on the board
jdk.dio.mmio.MMIOPermission Use of the Memory-Mapped I/O
(MMIO) capabilities on the board
jdk.dio.pwm.PWMPermission Use of the Pulse Width Modulation
(PWM) capabilities on the board
jdk.dio.spibus.SPIPermission Use of the SPI bus on the board
jdk.dio.uart.UARTPermission Use of the UART bus on the board
jdk.dio.watchdog.WatchdogTimerPermission Use of the watchdog timer on the
board
Overview of Oracle Java ME Embedded Permissions
Security 3-3
Accessing Peripherals
Applications that require access to Device I/O APIs must request appropriate
permissions in JAD files. For more information on using the Device I/O APIs, please
see the Device I/O API 1.1 specification and the associated Javadocs at the following
site:
http://docs.oracle.com/javame/
Signing the Application with API Permissions
First, the JAD file must have the proper API permissions. Here is how to sign the
application both in NetBeans and without an IDE.
• In NetBeans, right-click the project name and choose Properties. Select
Application Descriptor, then in the resulting pane, select API Permissions. Click
the Add... button, and add the appropriate permissions, as shown in Figure 3-1.
Click OK to close the project properties dialog.
Figure 3-1 Adding Permissions Using the NetBeans IDE
• If you are not using an IDE, you can manually modify the application descriptor
file to contain the following permissions.
MIDlet-Permission-1: com.oracle.dio.DeviceMgmtPermission "*:*" "open"
Method #1: Signing Application Using the NetBeans IDE
The NetBeans IDE enables developers both to sign the applications with a local
certificate and upload the certificate on the device. See the appropriate Getting Started
Guide for your embedded platform to learn how to use the NetBeans IDE to sign your
application.
Accessing Peripherals
3-4 Developer’s Guide
Method #2: Signing Application Using a Command Line
Signing applications using a command line is the preferred route for applications that
are widely distributed. Here are the instructions on how to setup a keystore with a
local certificate that can be used to sign the applications:
1. Generate a new self-signed certificate with the following command on the desktop,
using the keytool that is shipped with the Oracle Java SE JDK.
keytool -genkey -v -alias mycert -keystore mykeystore.ks -storepass
spass -keypass kpass -validity 360 -keyalg rsa -keysize 2048 -dname
"CN=thehost"
This command generates a 2048-bit RSA key pair and a self-signed certificate,
placing them in a new keystore with a keystore password of spass and a key
password of kpass that is valid for 360 days. You can change both passwords as
desired.
2. Copy the certs directory from the board over to the desktop using an sftp client
or scp command, change into the certs directory, and perform the following
command using the mekeytool.exe command (or alternatively java -jar
MEKeyTool.jar... if your distribution contains only that) that ships with the
Oracle Java ME SDK 8.3 distribution.
{mekeytool} -import -MEkeystore _main.ks -keystore
mykeystore.ks -storepass spass -alias mycert -domain trusted
This command imports the information in mykeystore.ks that you just created
to the _main.ks keystore. After this is completed, copy the certs directory back
to the board by using an sftp client or scp command.
3. Use the following commands to sign your application before deploying it to the
board:
jadtool -addcert -chainnum 1 -alias myalias -keystore mykeystore.ks
-storepass spass -inputkad myjad.jad -outputjad myjad.jad
To sign with the SHA256 signature algorithm, add the -useSha256 parameter. If
not present, the default algorithm SHA1withRSA is used.
jadtool -addjarsig -chainnum 1 -jarfile myjar.jar -alias myalias -
keystore mykeystore.ks -storepass spass -keypass kpass -inputjad
myjad.jad -outputjad myjad.jad -useSha256
Method #3: Using NullAuthenticationProvider
This method allows to bypass a certificate check and execute unsigned applications as
if they were signed and given all requested permissions. This method should be used
only for development and debugging. Final testing must be done using a real
certificate as described in method #1.
To use NullAuthenticationProvider, set the following property in the
jwc_properties.ini file on the board:
[internal]
authentication.provider = com.oracle.meep.security.NullAuthenticationProvider
Note that the Java runtime must not be running when editing the
jwc_properties.ini file.
Accessing Peripherals
Security 3-5
CLDC Permissions
The following permissions are available that affect the use of portions of the CLDC
libraries.
FilePermission
The java.io.FilePermission controls access to a file or directory. A
FilePermission consists of a pathname and a set of actions that are valid for the
resource specified by that pathname.
Resource Name
The resource name is simply the pathname of the file or directory granted the
specified actions. A pathname that ends in "/*" (where "/" is the file separator
character, File.separatorChar) indicates all the files and directories contained in
that directory. A pathname that ends with "/-" indicates all files and all recursive
subdirectories contained in that directory. A pathname consisting of the special token
"<<ALL FILES>>" matches any file.
Note:
A pathname need not have a leading "/". A pathname consisting of a single
"*" indicates all the files in the current directory, while a pathname consisting
of a single "-" indicates all the files in the current directory and recursively all
files and subdirectories contained in the current directory.
Actions
Table 3-5 shows the actions can be requested with this permission, as a list of commaseparated keywords:
Table 3-2 FilePermission Actions
Value Meaning
read Read permission
write Write permission
execute Execute permission
delete Permission to delete the resource
readlink Read a link permission. This is retained for SE compatibility but
is not currently used.
RuntimePermission
The java.lang.RuntimePermission represents runtime permissions. A
RuntimePermission contains a resource name, but no actions list.
Resource Name
The resource name is the name of the runtime permission. The naming convention
follows the hierarchical property naming convention. Also, an asterisk may appear at
CLDC Permissions
3-6 Developer’s Guide
the end of the name, following a ".", or by itself, to signify a wildcard match. For
example: "loadLibrary.*" and "*" signify a wildcard match, while
"*loadLibrary" and "a*b" do not.
Table 3-3 shows the possible runtime permissions that are allowed, as well as their
effects and possible risks of using them.
Table 3-3 RuntimePermission Actions
Value Effect Risks
exitVM.{exit
status}
Halting of the Java Virtual
Machine (JVM) with the
specified exit status
This allows an attacker to mount
a denial-of-service attack by
automatically forcing the virtual
machine to halt. Note that the
"exitVM.*" permission is
automatically granted to all code
loaded from the application class
path, thus enabling applications
to terminate themselves. Also,
the "exitVM" permission is
equivalent to "exitVM.*".
setSecurityManager Setting of the security
manager (possibly replacing
an existing security manager)
The security manager is a class
that allows applications to
implement a security policy.
Granting the
setSecurityManager
permission would allow code to
change which security manager
is used by installing a different,
possibly less restrictive security
manager, thereby bypassing
checks that would have been
enforced by the original security
manager.
createSecurityMana
ger
Creation of a new security
manager
This gives code access to
protected, sensitive methods that
may disclose information about
other classes or the execution
stack.
setIO Setting of System.out and
System.err
This allows changing the value of
the standard system streams. An
attacker may set System.err to
a null OutputStream, which
would hide any error messages
sent to System.err.
modifyThread Modification of threads,
possibly via calls to perform
thread interrupts, or
setPriority() and
setName() methods
This allows an attacker to modify
the behavior of any thread in the
system.
CLDC Permissions
Security 3-7
LoggingPermission
The java.util.logging.LoggingPermission is a permission which the security
manager will check when code that is running with a security manager calls one of the
logging control methods, such as Logger.setLevel().
Currently there is only one over-arching LoggingPermission, without resources or
actions. This permission simply grants the ability to control the logging configuration,
for example by adding or removing handlers, by adding or removing filters, or by
changing logging levels.
PropertyPermission
The java.util.PropertyPermission is for general Java property permissions.
Resource Name
The resource name is the name of the property (for example, "java.home" or
"os.name"). The naming convention follows the hierarchical property naming
convention. Also, an asterisk may appear at the end of the name, following a ".", or by
itself, to signify a wildcard match. For example: "java.*" and "*" signify a wildcard
match, while "*java" and "a*b" do not.
Actions
Table 3-4 shows the actions can be requested with this permission, as a list of commaseparated keywords:
Table 3-4 PropertyPermission Actions
Value Meaning
read Read permission
write Write permission
Care should be taken before granting code permission to access certain system
properties. For example, granting permission to access the "java.home" system
property gives potentially malevolent code sensitive information about the system
environment, such as the Java installation directory. Also, granting permission to
access the "user.name" and "user.home" system properties gives potentially
malevolent code sensitive information about the user environment, including the
user's account name and home directory.
Keystore Permissions
The following permissions are available that allow access to the Java ME keystore.
KeyStorePermission
The com.oracle.crypto.keystore.KeyStorePermission controls the type of
access allowed to the key store.
Resource Name
Table 3-5 shows the resource names that can be requested with this permission:
Keystore Permissions
3-8 Developer’s Guide
Table 3-5 KeyStorePermission Resource Names
Value Meaning
client_only Access to client certificates only
* Access to the entire certificate storage.
Device I/O Permissions
The following are among the more common permissions that can be requested from
most Oracle Java ME Embedded devices, depending on whether the functionality is
supported by the underlying board. See the Getting Started Guide for your embedded
board to determine which Device I/O permissions and resources are available for use.
ADCPermission
The jdk.dio.adc.ADCPermission class defines permissions for Analog-to-Digital
channel access on an embedded board.
Resource Name
The resource name is a numerical channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide
of your embedded board to determine which channel numbers are available for ADC
control.
Actions
Table 3-6 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-6 ADCPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of a device.
ATPermission
The jdk.dio.atcmd.ATPermission class defines permissions AT device access.
Resource Name
The resource name is a numerical channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide
of your embedded board to determine which channels are available for AT control.
Actions
Table 3-7 shows the actions can be requested with an ATPermission:
Table 3-7 ATPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open Open AT functions
Device I/O Permissions
Security 3-9
Table 3-7 (Cont.) ATPermission Actions
Value Meaning
data Open data connections
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of a device.
CounterPermission
The jdk.dio.counter.CounterPermission class defines permissions for pulse
counter access.
Resource Name
The resource name is a numerical channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide
of your embedded board to determine which channels are available for pulse counter
control.
Actions
Table 3-8 shows the actions can be requested with an ATPermission:
Table 3-8 CounterPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open Open and access pulse counter functions
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of a device.
DACPermission
The jdk.dio.dac.DACPermission class defines permissions for Digital-to-Analog
channel access on an embedded board.
Resource Name
The resource name is a numerical channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide
of your embedded board to determine which channel numbers are available for DAC
control.
Actions
Table 3-9 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-9 DACPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of a device.
Device I/O Permissions
3-10 Developer’s Guide
DeviceMgmtPermission
The jdk.dio.DeviceMgmtPermission class defines permissions for registering
and un-registering devices as well as opening devices using their registered
configurations.
Resource Name
The resource name is a combination of a device name and of a device ID or range of
device IDs. It takes the following form:
{device-name-spec} [ ":"{device-id-spec} ]
{device-name-spec}
The {device-name-spec} string takes the following form:
{device-name} | "*" | ""
The {device-name} string is a device name that is returned by a call to
DeviceDescriptor.getName().
A {device-name-spec} specification consisting of the asterisk ("*") matches all device
names. A {device-name-spec} specification consisting of the empty string ("") designates
an undefined device name that may only be matched by an empty string or an
asterisk.
{device-id-spec}
The {device-id-spec} string takes the following form:
{device-id} | "-"{device-id} | {device-id}"-"[{device-id}] | "*"
The {device-id} string is a device ID that is returned by a call to
DeviceDescriptor.getID(). Note that the characters in the string must all be
decimal digits.
A {device-id-spec} specification of the form "n-" (where n is a device ID) signifies all
device IDs numbered n and above, while a specification of the form "-n" indicates all
device IDs numbered n and below. A single asterisk in the place of the {device-id-spec}
field matches all device IDs.
The name "*:*" matches all device names and all device IDs, as is the name "*".
Actions
Table 3-10 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-10 DeviceMgmtPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open Open a device using its device name or ID
register Register a new device.
unregister Un-register a new device
GenericPermission
The jdk.dio.generic.GenericPermission class defines permissions for generic
device access on an embedded board.
Device I/O Permissions
Security 3-11
Resource Name
The resource name is a numerical channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide
of your embedded board to determine which channel numbers are available for
generic devices.
Actions
Table 3-11 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-11 GenericPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of a generic device.
GPIOPinPermission
The jdk.dio.gpio.GPIOPinPermission class defines permissions for General
Purpose I/O (GPIO) pin access on an embedded board.
Resource Name
The resource name is a numerical pin number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of
your embedded board to determine which pin numbers are available for GPIO
control.
Actions
Table 3-12 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-12 GPIOPinPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
setdirection Request permission to change the GPIO pin direction
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of a GPIO pin.
GPIOPortPermission
The jdk.dio.gpio.GPIOPortPermission class defines permissions for General
Purpose I/O (GPIO) port access on an embedded board. A GPIO port is made up of
several (typically eight) GPIO pins.
Resource Name
The resource name is a numerical port number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of
your embedded board to determine which port numbers are available for GPIO
control.
Actions
Table 3-13 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Device I/O Permissions
3-12 Developer’s Guide
Table 3-13 GPIOPortPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
setdirection Request permission to change the GPIO port direction
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of a GPIO port.
I2CPermission
The jdk.dio.i2cbus.I2CPermission class defines permissions for I2C bus access
on an embedded board.
Resource Name
The resource name is a channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of your
embedded board to determine which channel numbers are available for I2C control.
Actions
Table 3-14 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-14 I2CPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of an I2C bus.
MMIOPermission
The jdk.dio.mmio.MMIOPermission class defines permissions for MMIO bus
access on an embedded board.
Resource Name
The resource name is a memory-address (in hexadecimal format) returned by a call to
MMIODeviceConfig.getAddress(). The characters in the string must all be
hexadecimal digits. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of your embedded board to
determine which addresses are available for MMIO use.
Actions
Table 3-15 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-15 MMIOPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of an MMIO bus.
Device I/O Permissions
Security 3-13
PWMPermission
The jdk.dio.pwm.PWMPermission class defines permissions for Pulse Width
Modulation (PWM) channel access on an embedded board.
Resource Name
The resource name is a numerical channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide
of your embedded board to determine which channel numbers are available for PWM
control.
Actions
Table 3-16 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-16 PWMPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of a device.
SPIPermission
The jdk.dio.spibus.SPIPermission class defines permissions for SPI bus access
on an embedded board.
Resource Name
The resource name is a channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of your
embedded board to determine which channel numbers are available for SPI control.
Actions
Table 3-17 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-17 SPIPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of an SPI bus.
UARTPermission
The jdk.dio.uart.UARTPermission class defines permissions for UART bus
access on an embedded board.
Resource Name
The resource name is a channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of your
embedded board to determine which channel numbers are available for UART
control.
Device I/O Permissions
3-14 Developer’s Guide
Actions
Table 3-18 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-18 UARTPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of an UART bus.
WatchdogTimerPermission
The jdk.dio.watchdog.WatchdogTimerPermission class defines permissions
for the watchdog timer on an embedded board.
Resource Name
The resource name is a channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of your
embedded board to determine which channel number is available for the watchdog
timer.
Actions
Table 3-19 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-19 WatchdogTimerPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of the watchdog timer..
Smart Cards
The following permission allows access to smart cards on Java ME embedded devices.
APDUPermission
The javax.microedition.apdu.APDUPermission class represents access to a
smart card using the APDU protocol. An APDUPermission contains a resource name
(also called a target name) but no actions list. The target name is the symbolic name of
the APDUPermission.
Resource Name
The resource name can be one of two items, as shown in Table 3-20.
Table 3-20 APDUPermission Target Names
Target Name Permission Allows
aid The ability to communicate with a smart card application
identified by an AID target.
Smart Cards
Security 3-15
Table 3-20 (Cont.) APDUPermission Target Names
Target Name Permission Allows
sat The ability to communicate with a (U)SAT application on
channel 0.
Cellular
The following permissions deal with embedded devices that can connect to a cellular
network.
CellularPermission
The javax.microedition.cellular.CellularPermission class defines
permissions for cellular network resources on an embedded board. It consists only of a
resource name.
Resource Name
The resource name can be one of three items, as shown in Table 3-21.
Table 3-21 CellularPermission Resource Names
Resource Meaning
subscriber Resources that access or modify the cellular subscriber identity,
which is often recorded on a SIM, R-UIM, or CSIM.
network Resources that access the cellular network.
* All available cellular resources.
Generic Events
The following permissions deal with generic events that can be sent from the
underlying runtime operating system to the Oracle Java ME Embedded runtime.
EventPermission
The javax.microedition.event.EventPermission class defines permissions
that allow applications to receive events from the underlying runtime operating
system.
Resource Name
The resource name is the name of the event, such as "BATTERY_LEVEL" or
"com.MyCompany.MyEvent". The naming convention follows a hierarchical property
naming convention. Also, an asterisk may appear at the end of the name, following a
".", or by itself, to signify a wildcard match. For example, "com.MyCompany.*" or "*"
is valid, while "*MyCompany" or "a*b" is not valid.
Cellular
3-16 Developer’s Guide
Actions
The actions to be granted are a list of comma-separated keywords. The possible
keywords are "post", "postsystem", "read" and "register". Table 3-22 gives more
details on these keywords.
Table 3-22 EventPermission Actions
Value Meaning
post Permission to post an event.
postsystem Permission to post a system event. To see which system events
are supported, call
EventManager.getSystemEventNames().
read Permission to read an event.
readregister Permission to register and un-register applications to launch in
response to events.
COMM Protocol
The following permissions deal with embedded devices that can use a COMM
protocol through a serial port.
CommProtocolPermission
The javax.microedition.io.CommProtocolPermission class defines
permissions for COMM resources on an embedded board. It consists only of a
resource name.
Resource Name
The resource name is a base connection string and is typically formatted as:
comm:<port identifier>[<optional parameters>]
An exact BNF grammar for the COMM protocol URI is given in Table 3-23.
Table 3-23 CellularPermission Resource Names
Resource Meaning
base connection string "comm:"<port_id>[<options_list>] |
"comm:"<wildcarded_port_id>
<port_id> A non-empty case-sensitive string of alphanumeric characters
<wildcarded_port_id> All available cellular resources.
<options_list> *(<baud_rate_string>| <bitsperchar>| <stopbits>| <parity>|
<blocking>| <autocts>| <autorts>)
<baud_rate_string> ";baudrate="<baud_rate>
<baud_rate> non-empty string of digits
<bitsperchar> ";bitsperchar="<bit_value>
COMM Protocol
Security 3-17
Table 3-23 (Cont.) CellularPermission Resource Names
Resource Meaning
<bit_value> "7" | "8"
<stopbits> ";stopbits="<stop_value>
<stop_value> "1" | "2"
<parity> ";parity="<parity_value>
<parity_value> "even" | "odd" | "none"
<blocking> ";blocking="<on_off>
<autocts> ";autocts="<on_off>
<autorts> ";autorts="<on_off>
<on_off> "on" | "off"
Connector
The following permissions deal with those associated with the
javax.microedition.io.Connector class, a factory class for creating new
Connection objects.
CBS
The javax.microedition.io.Connector.cbs defines permissions for cellular
broadcast service.
Resource Name
The resource name is a channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of your
embedded board to determine which channel number is available for the CBS.
Actions
Table 3-24 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-24 Connector CBS Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of the CBS..
File Read
The javax.microedition.io.Connector.file.read defines permissions for
connections that read files.
Connector
3-18 Developer’s Guide
Resource Name
The resource name is a channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of your
embedded board to determine which channel number is available for reading files.
Actions
Table 3-25 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-25 Connector File Read Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of the file read..
File Write
The javax.microedition.io.Connector.file.write defines permissions for
connections that write files.
Resource Name
The resource name is a channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of your
embedded board to determine which channel number is available.
Actions
Table 3-26 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-26 WatchdogTimerPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of the file write..
RTSP
The javax.microedition.io.Connector.rtsp defines permissions for
connections that use the real-time streaming protocol (RTSP).
Resource Name
The resource name is a channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of your
embedded board to determine which channel number is available.
Actions
Table 3-27 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-27 WatchdogTimerPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
Connector
Security 3-19
Table 3-27 (Cont.) WatchdogTimerPermission Actions
Value Meaning
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of the RTSP..
SMS
The javax.microedition.io.Connector.sms defines permissions for SMS
messaging.
Resource Name
The resource name is a channel number. Refer to the Getting Started Guide of your
embedded board to determine which channel number is available for SMS.
Actions
Table 3-28 shows the actions can be requested with this permission:
Table 3-28 WatchdogTimerPermission Actions
Value Meaning
open The requested channel is opened and available for use.
powermanage Manage the power saving mode of the SMS..
Datagram Protocol
The following permissions deal with embedded devices that can use datagram
protocols.
DatagramProtocolPermission
The javax.microedition.io.DatagramProtocolPermission class represents
access rights to connections via the Datagram protocol. A
DatagramProtocolPermission consists of a URI string, but no actions.
The URI string specifies a connection for sending and receiving datagrams. It takes the
following general form:
datagram://{host}:{portspec} | datagram://[:{portspec}]
The value of the {host} field must be a symbolic hostname, a literal IPv4 address or an
IP-literal as specified by RFC 3986. An IP-literal requires an IPv6Address to bew
surrounded with square brackets ([]). Note that IPvFuture addresses from RFC 3986
are not currently supported.
The {host} field is omitted to indicate an inbound, server-mode connection. Servermode URIs may also omit the {portspec} field to request a system-assigned port
number. In such a case, the DatagramProtocolPermission is normalized to the
equivalent URI: datagram://:1024-65535.
If the {host} string is a DNS name, an asterisk may appear in the left-most position to
indicate a match of 1 or more entire domain labels. Partial domain label matches are
not permitted. For example, "*.oracle.com" is valid, but "*oracle.com" is not. An
asterisk by itself matches all hosts in outbound, client-mode connections.
Datagram Protocol
3-20 Developer’s Guide
The {portspec} string takes the following form:
portnumber | -portnumber | portnumber-[portnumber] | "*"
A {portspec} of the form "n-" (where n is a port number) signifies all ports numbered n
and above, while a specification of the form "-n" indicates all ports numbered n and
below. A single asterisk in the place of the {portspec} field matches all ports. Therefore,
the URI "datagram://:*" matches server-mode datagram connections to all ports,
and the URI "datagram://*:*" matches client-mode datagram connections to all
hosts on all ports.
DTLSProtocolPermission
The javax.microedition.io.DTLSProtocolPermission class represents
access rights to connections that use the Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS)
protocol. A DTLSProtocolPermission consists of a URI string but no actions
list.The URI string specifies a connection for sending and receiving datagrams. It takes
the following general form:
dtls://{host}:{portspec} The value of the {host} field must be a symbolic hostname, a
literal IPv4 address or an IP-literal as specified by RFC 3986. An IP-literal requires an
IPv6Address to be surrounded with square brackets ([]). Note that IPvFuture
addresses from RFC 3986 are not supported.
If the {host} string is a DNS name, an asterisk may appear in the left-most position to
indicate a match of 1 or more entire domain labels. Partial domain label matches are
not permitted. For example, "*.oracle.com" is valid, but "*oracle.com" is not. An
asterisk by itself matches all hosts in outbound, client-mode connections.
The {portspec} string takes the following form:
portnumber | -portnumber | portnumber-[portnumber] | "*"
A {portspec} of the form "n-" (where n is a port number) signifies all ports numbered n
and above, while a specification of the form "-n" indicates all ports numbered n and
below. A single asterisk in the place of the {portspec} field matches all ports. Therefore,
the URI "dtls://*:*" matches client-mode datagram connections to all hosts on all
ports.
DTLSServerPermission
The javax.microedition.io.DTLSServerPermission class represents access
rights to server connections via the the Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS)
protocol protocol. A DTLSServerPermission consists of a URI string but no actions
list. The URI string specifies a connection for sending and receiving datagrams. It
takes the following general form:
dtls://:{portspec}
The exact syntax for the DTLSSrverPermission URI is provided by this BNF.
The {portspec} string takes the following form:
portnumber | -portnumber | portnumber-[portnumber] | "*"
A {portspec} of the form "N-" (where N is a port number) signifies all ports numbered
N and above, while a specification of the form "-N" indicates all ports numbered N
and below. A single asterisk in the place of the {portspec} field matches all ports.
Therefore, the URI "dtls://*" matches secure-mode secure datagram connections to
all ports.
Datagram Protocol
Security 3-21
File Protocol
The following permissions deal with embedded devices that can use files.
FileProtocolPermission
The javax.microedition.io.FileProtocolPermission class represents
access rights to connections via the "file" protocol. A FileProtocolPermission
consists of a URI string indicating a fully-qualified, absolute pathname as well as a set
of actions desired for that pathname.
Resource Name
The URI string takes the following general form:
file://[{host}]{absolute_path} | file:{absolute_path}
The exact syntax is given by RFCs 1738 and 2396. In addition, a pathname that ends in
"/*" matches all the files and directories contained in that directory. A pathname that
ends with "/-" recursively matches all files and subdirectories contained in that
directory.
In addition to the syntax defined by RFC 1738, FileProtocolPermission must
accept and normalize URIs of the form file:{abs_path}. If {host} is omitted, it is
equivalent to using localhost. Also, note that {absolute_path} follows the syntax
defined for {fpath} in RFC 1738.
Actions
Table 3-29 shows the actions can be requested with this permission. Note that multiple
actions can be requested by separating keywords with commas.
Table 3-29 FileProtocolPermission Actions
Value Meaning
read The file can be read from using the protocol.
write The file can be written to using the protocol.
Hypertext Transfer Protocols
The following permissions deal with embedded devices that can use HTTP or HTTPS
protocols.
HTTPProtocolPermission
The javax.microedition.io.HTTPProtocolPermission class represents
access rights to connections via the HTTP protocol. An HttpProtocolPermission
consists of a URI string, but no actions list.
The URI string specifies a data resource accessible via HTTP. It takes the following
general form:
http://{host}[:{portspec}][{pathname}][?{query}][#{fragment}]
The value of the {host} field must be a symbolic hostname, a literal IPv4 address or an
IP-literal as specified by RFC 3986. An IP-literal requires IPv6Address to be
File Protocol
3-22 Developer’s Guide
surrounded with square brackets ([]). IPvFuture addresses from RFC 3986 are not
supported.
If the {host} string is a DNS name, an asterisk may appear in the left-most position to
indicate a match of one or more entire domain labels. Partial domain label matches are
not permitted. For example, "*.oracle.com" is valid, but "*oracle.com" is not. An
asterisk by itself matches all hosts.
The {portspec} string takes the following form:
portnumber | -portnumber | portnumber-[portnumber] | * | empty string
A {portspec} specification of the form "n-" (where n is a port number) signifies all ports
numbered n and above, while a specification of the form "-n" indicates all ports
numbered n and below. A single asterisk in the place of the {portspec} field matches all
ports; therefore, the URI "http://*:*" matches HTTP connections to all hosts on all
ports. If the {portspec} field is omitted, default port 80 is assumed.
HTTPSProtocolPermission
The javax.microedition.io.HTTPSProtocolPermission class represents
access rights to connections via the HTTPS protocol. A HttpsProtocolPermission
consists of a URI string, but no actions list.
The URI string specifies a data resource accessible via secure HTTPS. It takes the
following general form:
http://{host}[:{portspec}][{pathname}][?{query}][#{fragment}]
The value of the {host} field must be a symbolic hostname, a literal IPv4 address or an
IP-literal as specified by RFC 3986. An IP-literal requires IPv6Address to be
surrounded with square brackets ([]). IPvFuture addresses from RFC 3986 are not
supported.
If the {host} string is a DNS name, an asterisk may appear in the left-most position to
indicate a match of one or more entire domain labels. Partial domain label matches are
not permitted. For example, "*.oracle.com" is valid, but "*oracle.com" is not. An
asterisk by itself matches all hosts.
The {portspec} string takes the following form:
portnumber | -portnumber | portnumber-[portnumber] | * | empty string
A {portspec} specification of the form "n-" (where n is a port number) signifies all ports
numbered n and above, while a specification of the form "-n" indicates all ports
numbered n and below. A single asterisk in the place of the {portspec} field matches all
ports; therefore, the URI "https://*:*" matches HTTPS connections to all hosts on
all ports. If the {portspec} field is omitted, default port 443 is assumed.
IMC
The following permissions deal with embedded devices that use the Inter-MIDlet
Communication (IMC) protocol.
IMCProtocolPermission
The javax.microedition.io.IMCProtocolPermission class defines
permissions for inter-MIDlet communication on an embedded board. IMC uses a lowlevel asynchronous bi-directional stream connection for communication between
applications. The permission consists only of a resource name.
IMC
Security 3-23
Resource Name
The resource name consists of a number of rules to create a base client connection
string; these rules are shown in Table 3-30.
Table 3-30 IMCProtocolPermission Resource Name Rules
Rule Meaning
Base client connection
string
"imc://" (<Application UID> | "*") ":" <server name> ":"
<server version> ";"
<Application UID> <Application suite vendor>":" <Application suite name>":"
<Application suite version>
<Application suite vendor> :The application suite vendor
<Application suite name> The application suite name
<Application suite version> Formatted application suite version or wildcard character "*"
<server name> IMC server name following the class naming syntax
<server version> The version of the IMC server. Version backward compatibility
is assumed.Versioning follows the format defined for the
MIDlet-Version attribute.
Note that in the first rule, the wildcard "*" may be used instead of a specific
<Application UID> when opening an IMC client connection. When the wildcard
character is used, it allows the client to connect to any applications (even those from
different vendors) if they all provide the same IMC service and meet the authorization
requirements. However, which application's IMC server the client will be connected to
is implementation specific.
Multicast Protocols
The following permissions deal with embedded devices that use the multicast
protocols.
MulticastProtocolPermission
The javax.microedition.io.MulticastProtocolPermission class
represents access rights to connections via the "multicast" protocol. A
MulticastProtocolPermission consists of a URI string but no actions list.
The exact syntax for the MulticastProtocolPermission URI is provided by rules
shown in Table 3-31.
Table 3-31 MulticastProtocolPermission Resource Name Rules
Rule Meaning
base multicast connection
string
<inbound_connection> | <outbound_connection>
<inbound_connection> "multicast://: [ <portnumber> ] [ <auto_join> ]
<outbound_connection> "multicast://" <host> ":" <portnumber>
Multicast Protocols
3-24 Developer’s Guide
Table 3-31 (Cont.) MulticastProtocolPermission Resource Name Rules
Rule Meaning
<multicast_permission> "multicast://"[<hostspec>] ":" <portspec>
<host> <host name> | <ipaddr>
<ipaddr> IPv4 address | '[' IPv6 address ']'
<hostspec> <host> | "*" .
<auto_join> "?join="<host>
<portspec> <portnumber> | <portrange> | "*"
<portnumber> numeric port number
<portrange> <portnumber> "-" | "-" <portnumber> | <portnumber> "-"
<portnumber>
The value of the {host} field must be a symbolic hostname, a literal IPv4 multicast
address or a literal IPv6 address surrounded by square brackets ([]), as specified by
RFC 3986. The {hostspec} may be "*" to allow connection to any multicast host group.
The {hostspec} field may also be omitted to indicate an inbound, server-mode
connection.
Server-mode URIs may also omit the <portspec> field to request a system-assigned port
number. In such a case, the MulticastProtocolPermission is normalized to the
equivalent URI "multicast://:1024-65535".
The <portspec> string takes the following form:
portnumber | -portnumber | portnumber-[portnumber] | "*"
A <portspec> specification of the form "n-" (where n is a port number) signifies all ports
numbered n and above, while a specification of the form "-n" indicates all ports
numbered n and below. A single asterisk in the place of the <portspec> field matches
all ports. Therefore, the URI "multicast://<ipaddr>:" matches multicast a host
group to all ports, and the URI "multicast://*:*" matches multicast connections to
all host groups on all ports.
Push Protocols
The following permissions deal with embedded devices that use push protocols.
PushRegistryPermission
The javax.microedition.io.PushRegistryPermission class is used to check
the static and dynamic registration of push connections and for registration of an
alarm. The permission covers static registration via application attributes, and
dynamic registration via PushRegistry.registerConnection(...) and alarm
registration with PushRegistry.registerAlarm().
For the purposes of Push Registration permission, the URI MUST consist only of the
scheme and delimiter (":") as defined by RFC-3986. The scheme may contain the
wildcard character "*", which allows registration of all schemes. For alarm
registration, the URI is "*" and the action is alarm. Push registration and alarm
Push Protocols
Security 3-25
registration can be combined in a single permission. For example, the resource is
"file:" and the actions are "static,dynamic,alarm".
Actions
Table 3-32 shows the actions can be requested with this permission. Note that multiple
actions can be requested by separating keywords with commas.
Table 3-32 PushRegistryPermission Actions
Value Meaning
static Allows registration of a Push Connection in the packaging of
the application suite
dynamic Allows registration of a Push Connection using
PushRegistry.registerConnection
alarm Allows registration of an alarm using
PushRegistry.registerAlarm
Socket Protocols
The following permissions deal with embedded devices that can use HTTP or HTTPS
protocols.
SocketProtocolPermission
The javax.microedition.io.SocketProtocolPermission class represents
access rights to connections via the "socket" protocol. A
SocketProtocolPermission consists of a URI string but no actions list.
The URI string specifies a socket stream connection. It takes the following general
form:
socket://{host}:{portspec} | socket://[:{portspec}]
The exact syntax for the SocketProtocolPermission URI is given by the grammar
in Table 3-33.
Table 3-33 SocketProtocolPermission Resource Name Rules
Rule Meaning
base socket connection
string
"socket://"<inbound_connection> |
"socket://"<outbound_connection>
<inbound_connection> ": " | ":" [ <porspec> ] | empty string
<outbound_connection> <host> ":" <portspec>
<host> <host name> | <ipaddr> | <wildcarded DNS>
<ipaddr> IPv4 address | '[' IPv6 address ']'
<wildcarded_DNS> "*" *("."<domainlabel>) | "*" followed by zero or more internet
domain labels, separated by "."
<domainlabel> internet domain label
Socket Protocols
3-26 Developer’s Guide
Table 3-33 (Cont.) SocketProtocolPermission Resource Name Rules
Rule Meaning
<portspec> <portnumber> | <portrange> | "*"
<portnumber> numeric port number
<portrange> <portnumber> "-" | "-" <portnumber> | <portnumber> "-"
<portnumber>
The value of the {host} field must be a symbolic hostname, a literal IPv4 address or an
IP-literal with an IPv6Address as specified by RFC 3986. An IPv6Address must be
surrounded with square brackets ([]). Note that IPvFuture addresses are not
currently supported.
The {host} field may be omitted to indicate a server-mode connection. Server-mode
URIs may also omit the {portspec} field to indicate a system-assigned port number. In
such a case, the SocketProtocolPermission is normalized to the equivalent URI
"socket://:1024-65535".
If the {host} string is a DNS name, an asterisk may appear in the left-most position to
indicate a match of one or more entire domain labels. Partial domain label matches are
not permitted, therefore "*.oracle.com" is valid, but "*oracle.com" is not. An
asterisk by itself matches all hosts in client-mode connections;
The {portspec} string takes the following form:
portnumber | "-" portnumber | portnumber "-" [portnumber] | "*"
A {portspec} specification of the form "n-" (where n is a port number) signifies all ports
numbered n and above, while a specification of the form "-n" indicates all ports
numbered n and below. A single asterisk may be used in place of the {portspec} field to
indicate all ports. Therefore, the URI "socket://:*" matches server-mode socket
connections to all ports, and the URI "socket://*:*" matches client-mode socket
connections to all hosts on all ports.
Note:
The syntax of URLs accepted by Connector.open() for sockets differs from
the syntax for SocketProtocolPermission. In the socket: protocol, the
":" delimiter must always be present even if there is no port number, whereas
the delimiter must not be present unless there is a port number in
SocketProtocolPermission.
SSLProtocolPermission
The javax.microedition.io.SSLProtocolPermission class represents access
rights to connections that use the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol. A
SSLProtocolPermission consists of a URI string but no actions list.
The URI string specifies a secure socket stream connection. It takes the following
general form:
ssl://{host}:{portspec} | ssl://[:{portspec}]
The exact syntax for the SSLProtocolPermission URI is given in Table 3-34.
Socket Protocols
Security 3-27
Table 3-34 SSLProtocolPermission Resource Name Rules
Rule Meaning
base SSL connection string "ssl://"<inbound_connection> |
"ssl://"<outbound_connection>
<inbound_connection> ": " | ":" [ <portspec> ] | empty string
<outbound_connection> <host> ":" <portspec>
<host> <host name> | <ipaddr> | <wildcarded DNS>
<ipaddr> IPv4 address | '[' IPv6 address ']'
<wildcarded_DNS> "*" *("."<domainlabel>) | "*" followed by zero or more internet
domain labels, separated by "."
<domainlabel> internet domain label
<portspec> <portnumber> | <portrange> | "*"
<portnumber> numeric port number
<portrange> <portnumber> "-" | "-" <portnumber> | <portnumber> "-"
<portnumber>
The value of the {host} field must be a symbolic hostname, a literal IPv4 address or an
IP-literal as specified by RFC 3986. An IPv6Address must be surrounded with square
brackets ([]). Note that IPvFuture addresses are not supported.
The {host} field is omitted to indicate a server-mode connection. Server-mode URIs
may also omit the {portspec} field to indicate a system-assigned port number. In such a
case, the SSLProtocolPermission is normalized to the equivalent URI "ssl://:
1024-65535".
If the {host} string is a DNS name, an asterisk may appear in the left-most position to
indicate a match of one or more entire domain labels. Partial domain label matches are
not permitted, therefore "*.oracle.com" is valid, but "*oracle.com" is not. An
asterisk by itself matches all hosts.
The {portspec} string takes the following form:
portnumber | -portnumber | portnumber-[portnumber] | "*"
A {portspec} specification of the form "n-" (where n is a port number) signifies all ports
numbered n and above, while a specification of the form "-n" indicates all ports
numbered n and below. A single asterisk in the place of the {portspec} field matches all
ports. Therefore, the URI "ssl://:*" matches secure server connections to all ports,
and the URI "ssl://*:*" matches secure connections to all hosts on all ports.
Location
The following permissions allow location functionality on an embedded device.
Location
3-28 Developer’s Guide
LocationPermission
The javax.microedition.LocationPermission class is used to allow access to
the location functionality of an embedded device. This permission consists of only the
class, but no targets or actions.
Media
The following permissions deal with embedded devices that have the ability to record
or playback media.
RecordControl
The javax.microedition.media.RecordControl class allows Java ME
embedded applications to control audio recording on an embedded device. This
permission consists of only the class, but no targets or actions.
VideoControl
The javax.microedition.media.VideoControl.getSnapshot permissions
grants Java ME embedded applications the ability to take snapshot pictures on an
embedded device. This permission consists of only the class, but no targets or actions.
Auto-Start
The following permissions allow auto-start functionality on an embedded device.
AutoStartPermission
The javax.microedition.midlet.AutoStartPermission allows applications
in an application suite to assume the auto-start application behavior.
Resource Names
Table 3-35 shows the names that are allowed with this permission.
Table 3-35 AutoStartPermission Actions
Value Meaning
allowed Auto-start of the application is allowed
not allowed Auto-start of the application is not allowed
Power
The following permission allows applications to access the power state functionality of
an embedded device.
PowerStatePermission
The javax.microedition.power.PowerStatePermission allows calls to
PowerManager.setPowerState() method.
Media
Security 3-29
Resource Names
Table 3-36 shows the names that are allowed with this permission.
Table 3-36 PowerStatePermission Actions
Value Meaning
set Calls to setPowerState(..., false) are allowed
setUrgent Calls to setPowerState(..., true) are allowed
Software Management
The following permissions allow applications to use of the software management
(SWM) APIs on an embedded device.
SWMPermission
The javax.microedition.power.SWMPermission provides permission handling
for SWM API permissions. An SWMPermission object contains a resource and
actions.
Resource Names
Table 3-37 shows the resource names that are allowed with this permission.
Table 3-37 SWMPermission Resource Names
Value Meaning
client Permission to perform the listed actions only for applications
assigned to the same client
crossClient Permission to perform the listed actions also for applications
assigned to other clients. Usually this is a permission reserved
for the root client. Granting this permissions to other clients
should carefully considered to avoid security breaches.
Actions
The actions to be granted are a list of comma-separated keywords, as shown in Table
3-38, as well as whether they are permitted on a trusted and non-trusted client.
Table 3-38 SWMPermission Actions
Name and Action Assigned to Trusted Client Assigned to Non-Trusted Client
client,
manageSuite
Permitted Not Permitted.
client,
installation
Permitted. Not Permitted.
client, manageTask Permitted. Not Permitted.
crossClient,
manageSuite
Permitted, but not
recommended
Not Permitted.
Software Management
3-30 Developer’s Guide
Table 3-38 (Cont.) SWMPermission Actions
Name and Action Assigned to Trusted Client Assigned to Non-Trusted Client
crossClient,
installation
Permitted, but not
recommended
Not Permitted.
crossClient,
manageTask
Permitted, but not
recommended
Not Permitted.
Runtime Update
The following permission allows to update the Java ME runtime on an embedded
device remotely.
RuntimeUpdatePermission
The RuntimeUpdatePermission allows calls to the
RuntimeUpdateManager.saveNewRuntime(java.io.InputStream) and
RuntimeUpdateManager.scheduleUpdateAfterReboot() methods.
Resource Names
shows the names that are allowed with this permission.
Table 3-39 RuntimeUpdatePermission Names
Value Meaning
save Calls to saveNewRuntime are allowed
update Calls to scheduleUpdateAfterReboot are allowed
Runtime Update
Security 3-31
Runtime Update
3-32 Developer’s Guide
4
Software Management
This chapter introduces the Software Management (SWM) APIs of the Java ME
Embedded Profile (MEEP) version 8. These APIs provided extended software
management features for Oracle Java ME Embedded applications, as given in the
javax.microedition.swm package. There are five interfaces and six classes in this
package that can be used by applications to enhance software management. In
addition, there are a number of enumerations that are present in the package; these are
documented near the classes and methods that use them throughout this chapter.
SuiteInstallListener Interface
SuiteInstallListener is a sub-interface that provides progress data for an
installer that is downloading an app or a link.
The interface consists of two methods, both of which are called at certain times during
installation. One is the installationDone() method, which provides only a single
code, the definitions of which can be found in the InstallerErrorCode interface.
The other is the updateStatus() method, which identifies the current task as one of
the SuiteInstallStage constants that are shown in Table 4-1, and provides an
integer percentage of completeness.
Table 4-1 SuiteInstallState
Name Description
DONE Installation has completed
DOWNLOADING_BODY Install stage: downloading application body.
DOWNLOADING_DATA Install stage: downloading additional application
data.
DOWNLOADING_DESCRIPTOR Install stage: downloading application descriptor.
STORING Install stage: storing application.
VERIFYING Install stage: verifying downloaded content.
Here are the two method defined in the SuiteInstallListener interface:
• void installationDone(int errorCode)
This method is called by the installer to report that the installation has completed.
The resulting integer code is contained in the InstallerErrorCode class. See
“InstallerErrorCode” for more information about installation error codes.
• void updateStatus(SuiteManagementTracker tracker,
SuiteInstallStage status, int percent)
Software Management 4-1
This method is called by the installer to inform the listener of the current status of
the install. The stage is given by an integer constant as shown in Table 4-1. The
percent is an integer between 0 and 100.
SuiteListener Interface
SuiteListener is an interface that provides a notification that the current state of a
suite has changed.
There is only one method defined in the SuiteListener interface:
• void notifySuiteStateChanged(SuiteManagementTracker tracker,
SuiteState newState)
This method is called to notify a listener that the current state of a suite has
changed. A reference to the current SuiteManagementTracker is included, as
well as an instance of SuiteState, which indicates the new state.
SuiteManager Interface
The SuiteManager interface consists of only seven methods that add or remove
suites, add or remove suite listeners, retrieve a list of the currently installed suites, or
retrieve the current SuiteInstaller.
• void addSuiteListener(SuiteListener theListener)
This method adds a SuiteListener object to the current SuiteManager.
• Suite getSuite(java.lang.String vendor, java.lang.String
name)
This method returns an instance of the currently installed Suite.
• SuiteInstaller getSuiteInstaller(byte[] instData, int offset,
int length, boolean ignoreUpdateLock)
This method returns the current SuiteInstaller.
• SuiteInstaller getSuiteInstaller(java.lang.String
locationUrl, boolean ignoreUpdateLock)
This method returns the current SuiteInstaller
• java.util.List<Suite> getSuites(SuiteType type)
This method requests a list of installed suites of specified type.
• void removeSuite(Suite suite, boolean ignoreRemoveLock)
This method removes a Suite.
• void removeSuiteListener(SuiteListener theListener)
This method removes a SuiteListener.
TaskListener Interface
The TaskListener interface is an interface used to receive updates about a task that
is currently running.
• void notifyStatusUpdate(Task task, TaskStatus newStatus)
SuiteListener Interface
4-2 Developer’s Guide
This method is called when the current task has a new status update to report. The
method passes a reference to the Task in question, as well as a TaskStatus object
reporting the new status.
TaskManager Interface
The TaskManager interface is an interface used to manage the tasks.
• void addTaskListener(TaskListener) throws SecurityException
This method adds a TaskListener.
• Task getCurrentTask() throws SecurityException
This method returns the current task that is running.
• java.util.List<Task> getTaskList(boolean includeSystem)
This method obtains a list of Task objects. If system tasks are to be included, that
can be specified with the boolean parameter.
• void removeTaskListener(TaskListener listener)
This method removes a TaskListener.
• boolean setForegroundTask(Task task) throws
java.lang.IllegalArgumentException
This method assigns the specified task to be the currently running foreground task.
A task is said to be in the foreground if the LUI API or another UI API is supported
and the task is visible on the display, or if the Key API is supported and input
device events will be delivered to it. If none of those packages is supported by the
implementation, a call to this method has no effect.
• boolean setPriority(Task task, TaskPriority priority) throws
java.lang.IllegalArgumentException
Changes the priority for the given task. The method returns true if the change was
successful, or false otherwise.
• Task startTask(Suite suite, String className) throws
java.lang.IllegalArgumentException,
java.lang.IllegalStateException
Starts a Task from the given class name in the given Suite. This method throws
an exception if suite is a library and can therefore not be started. Calling this
method schedules a new application execution. The new task is created with
TaskStatus.STARTING on success or TaskStatus.START_FAILED on failure.
More than one call to this method can be performed with the same arguments. In
this case subsequent calls lead to attempts to re-start the task. In case of
unsuccessful attempt to re-start the task, an appropriate exception is thrown or the
corresponding state TaskStatus.START_FAILED is set to the returned task
object.
• boolean stopTask(Task task) throws java.lang.IllegalArgumentException,
java.lang.IllegalStateException
This method cancels an installation that is in progress. It returns true if the
cancellation was successful, or false otherwise.
TaskManager Interface
Software Management 4-3
ManagerFactory Class
The ManagerFactory class is a global factory that is used to obtain a SuiteManager
or a TaskManager implementation.
• static SuiteManager getSuiteManager()
This method returns an implementation of a SuiteManager.
• static TaskManager getTaskManager()
This method returns an implementation of a TaskManager.
The Suite Class
All IMlet suites maintain a basic set of identification and state information that acts as
a descriptor. This descriptor is represented by the Suite class.
Suites can be one of four types, presented in the SuiteType enumeration, and shown
in Table 4-2:
Table 4-2 SuiteType Enumeration
Suite Type Description
ST_APPLICATION The suite contains one or more MIDlets with an entry point that
can be executed.
ST_LIBRARY The suite is a library that can be used by one or more
applications.
ST_SYSTEM The suite is a system-level application.
ST_INVALID The suite is invalid and cannot be found or executed.
In addition, suites contain binary flags that describe their state, presented in the
SuiteStateFlag enumeration, and shown in Table 4-3:
Table 4-3 SuiteStageFlag Enumeration
State Description
AVAILABLE The suite is available for use.
ENABLED The suite is enabled. When a suite is disabled, any attempt to
run application or use a library from this suite should fail.
SYSTEM The suite is a system-level suite.
PREINSTALLED The suite is a system-level suite that cannot be updated.
REMOVE_DENIED The suite should not be removed.
UPDATE_DENIED The suite should not be updated.
The following are method present in the Suite class.
• java.lang.String getName()
ManagerFactory Class
4-4 Developer’s Guide
This method returns the name for the given suite.
• java.lang.String getVendor()
This method returns the vendor for the given suite.
• java.lang.String getVersion()
This method returns the version of the given suite.
• java.lang.String getDownloadUrl()
This method returns the URL that the JAD or JAR was downloaded from.
• java.util.Iteration<String> getAttributes()
This method returns a String array that provides the names of the available
properties. The properties returned are those from the JAD file and the manifest
combined into a single array.
• java.lang.String getAttributeValue(String name)
This method retrieves the value for the respective attribute name.
• SuiteType getSuiteType()
This method returns the suite type. See Table 4-2 for more information.
• public boolean isSuiteState(SuiteStateFlag state)
This method checks the current state boolean to see if it is true.
• public void setSuiteStateFlag(SuiteStateFlag state, boolean
value) throws java.lang.IllegalArgumentException,
java.lang.IllegalStateException, java.lang.SecurityException
This method sets the specified flag to the specified value. If a Suite has been
created, SuiteStateFlag.ENABLED and SuiteStateFlag.AVAILABLE are
always set to true, while SuiteStateFlag.REMOVE_DENIED and
SuiteStateFlag.UPDATE_DENIED are set to false. These states can be
changed by calling this method. The SuiteStateFlag.SYSTEM and
SuiteStateFlag.PREINSTALLED flags are only set for system suites or preinstalled suites, respectively, and cannot be unset or set by this method. To be able
to set suite flags, caller application should request
javax.microedition.swm.SWMPermission("client", "manageSuite")
or javax.microedition.swm.SWMPermission ("crossClient",
"manageSuite") permission. See SWMPermission for more details.
• public java.util.Iterator<java.lang.String> getMIDlets()
This method returns a list of the applications (application class names) in this suite.
The first application in the enumeration is the default application as specified in the
MIDlet-1 field of the descriptor.
• public java.util.Iterator<Suite> getDependencies()
This method returns a list of the shared libraries this Suite depends on
• public boolean isTrusted()
Checks if this Suite is trusted or not. The return value is always true if it is a
SYSTEM_SUITE.
• public boolean isInstalled()
The Suite Class
Software Management 4-5
Checks if this Suite is still installed or has been removed.
SuiteInstaller Class
The ManagerFactory class is a global factory that is used to obtain a SuiteManager
or a TaskManager implementation.
• void addInstallationListener(SuiteInstallListener listener)
This method adds a SuiteInstallListener to this suite installer
• void removeInstallationListener(SuiteInstallationListener
listener)
This method removes a SuiteInstallListener to this suite installer.
• SuiteManagementTracker start()
This method starts installation of the suite. The installation can be the first
installation of this suite, or a re-installation (update) of a suite that had been
installed before. A SuiteInstallListener must be added in order to handle
callback requests.This method returns an instance of SuiteManagementTracker;
the caller can observe the progress of the installation via the
SuiteInstallListener added. Please note that the method may not return
quickly. Depending on the provisioning mechanism used in the implementation of
MEEP 8, it may be necessary to download the entire JAR data first in order to
inspect the manifest of the application suite in order to find out whether this is a
new installation or an update of an existing application suite. Depending on the
network connection, this may take some time.In case the previous attempt to install
this suite (initiated by a previous call of the start() method) has not been
finished at the time the new call takes place, the call is queued and the new attempt
to install (in case the first one failed) or the re-installation (in case the first call was
successful), respectively, starts as soon as the first installation attempt or
installation has been finished.A new instance of SuiteManagementTracker will
be created for every call to this method and assigned to the Suite to be installed as
soon as the installation has been completed successfully. In case of an update of an
existing Suite, the SuiteManagementTracker instance is assigned to the
existing Suite object from the beginning.If the initiating application does not have
the right SWMPermission, the installation will fail with
InstallErrorCodes.UNAUTHORIZED_INSTALL.
• void cancel()
Begins installation of the suite.
SuiteManagementTracker Class
An instance of this class is generated as soon as an installation or update of a Suite is
started using SuiteInstaller.start(). Invoking that method creates a new
tracker instance. Whether two trackers refer to the same Suite can be found out by
calling getSuite() for both and compare the returned Suite instances. The tracker
instance created for a management operation is passed to any call of
SuiteListener.notifySuiteStateChanged() in order to inform about the
progress of this operation.
For the installation of a new Suite, as long as the installation hasn't been successfully
completed, an instance of SuiteManagementTracker is not assigned to any Suite
instance yet, as it does not exit yet. In these cases, a call to getSuite() returns null.
SuiteInstaller Class
4-6 Developer’s Guide
In case of an update, the tracker is assigned to the existing Suite from the beginning,
though.
This class has one method.
• Suite getSuite()
This method returns the Suite that this tracker is assigned to, if the installation
has completed successfully
SWMPermission Class
The SWMPermission provides permission handling for SWM API permissions. An
SWMPermission object contains a scope and actions. The scope is the scope of the
permission. Valid scopes are "client" stands for permission to perform the listed
actions only for applications assigned to the same Client. "crossClient" stands for
permission to perform the listed actions also for applications assigned to other Clients.
Usually this is a permission reserved for the Root Client. Granting this permissions to
other Clients should be figured out well in order to avoid security breaches.The
actions to be granted are passed to the constructor in a non-empty string, containing a
list of comma-separated keywords. Trailing and leading white spaces as well as those
between the keywords and commas in the list are not allowed and lead to an
IllegalArgumentException. The possible values can be seen in this table in the
Security Policy Provider chapter of the spec. The actions string is converted to
lowercase before processing.
This class has one constructor and several methods.
• SWMPermission(java.lang.String scope, java.lang.String
actions)
This method creates a new SWMPermission object with the specified name and
actions.
• public boolean implies(java.security.Permission p)
This method checks if the specified permission is "implied" by this object.
• String getActions()
This method returns the permitted actions of this Permission as a comma
separated list in alphabetical order.
• java.security.PermissionCollection newPermissionCollection()
This method creates a new SWMPermissionCollection.
Task Class
The Task class is, in effect, a simple task descriptor. A Task is the abstraction of the
execution of an application (see javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet). Tasks are
started using the TaskManager.startTask() method, where the arguments
specify the application suite and the class within the suite being the starting point of
the application. Starting a new task attempts to execute corresponding application. A
task has a status, as described in the TaskStatus enumeration, that describes
corresponding application lifecycle state. A task has a priority with possible values as
described in TaskPriority. Depending on whether the implementation supports
multiple VMs, several tasks can run in parallel.There are special tasks called system
tasks. Those tasks cannot be started or stopped via this API, but are started by the
SWMPermission Class
Software Management 4-7
system. The isSystemTask() method can be used to find out whether a task is a
considered a system task.
The Task class contains the following methods.
• String getName()
This is a convenience method for returning the name of the task. The returned
string is the name of the application running in this task.
• TaskPriority getPriority()
This method returns the priority of given task.
• public int getHeapUse()
This method returns the heap use of given task.
• public TaskStatus getStatus()
This method returns the task's status.
• public Suite getSuite()
This method returns the suite information this task executed from.
• public boolean isSystemTask()
This method returns a boolean indicating whether a task is a system task.
InstallerErrorCode
The InstallerErrorCode provides several constants used by the installation
routines. These constants are shown in Table 4-4.
Table 4-4 Installer Error Codes
Constant Description
ALREADY_INSTALLED The JAD matches a version of a suite already
installed.
APP_INTEGRITY_FAILURE_DEPENDENCY
_CONFLICT
Application Integrity Failure: two or more
dependencies exist on the component with the
same name and vendor, but have different
versions or hashs.
APP_INTEGRITY_FAILURE_DEPENDENCY
_MISMATCH
Application Integrity Failure: there is a
component name or vendor mismatch between
the component JAD and IMlet or component
JAD that depends on it.
APP_INTEGRITY_FAILURE_HASH_MISMA
TCH
Application Integrity Failure: hash mismatch.
ATTRIBUTE_MISMATCH A attribute in both the JAD and JAR manifest
does not match.
AUTHORIZATION_FAILURE Application authorization failure, possibly
indicating that the application was not digitally
signed.
InstallerErrorCode
4-8 Developer’s Guide
Table 4-4 (Cont.) Installer Error Codes
Constant Description
CA_DISABLED Indicates that the trusted certificate authority
(CA) for this suite has been disabled for
software authorization.
CANCELED Canceled by user.
CANNOT_AUTH The server does not support basic
authentication.
CIRCULAR_COMPONENT_DEPENDENCY Circular dynamic component dependency.
COMPONENT_DEPS_LIMIT_EXCEEDED Dynamic component dependencies limit
exceeded.
CONTENT_HANDLER_CONFLICT The installation of a content handler would
conflict with an already installed handler.
CORRUPT_DEPENDENCY_HASH A dependency has a corrupt hash code.
CORRUPT_JAR An entry could not be read from the JAR.
CORRUPT_PROVIDER_CERT The content provider certificate cannot be
decoded.
CORRUPT_SIGNATURE The JAR signature cannot be decoded.
DEVICE_INCOMPATIBLE The device does not support either the
configuration or profile in the JAD.
DUPLICATED_KEY Duplicated JAD/manifest key attribute
EXPIRED_CA_KEY The certificate authority's public key has
expired.
EXPIRED_PROVIDER_CERT The content provider certificate has expired.
INSUFFICIENT_STORAGE Not enough storage for this suite to be
installed.
INVALID_CONTENT_HANDLER The MicroEdition-Handler-<n> JAD
attribute has invalid values.
INVALID_JAD_TYPE The server did not have a resource with the
correct type or the JAD downloaded has the
wrong media type.
INVALID_JAD_URL The JAD URL is invalid.
INVALID_JAR_TYPE The server did not have a resource with the
correct type or the JAR downloaded has the
wrong media type.
INVALID_JAR_URL The JAR URL is invalid.
INVALID_KEY A key for an attribute is not formatted
correctly.
InstallerErrorCode
Software Management 4-9
Table 4-4 (Cont.) Installer Error Codes
Constant Description
INVALID_NATIVE_LIBRARY A native library contained within the JAR
cannot be loaded.
INVALID_PAYMENT_INFO Indicates that the payment information
provided with the IMlet suite is incomplete or
incorrect.
INVALID_PROVIDER_CERT The signature of the content provider certificate
is invalid.
INVALID_SIGNATURE The signature of the JAR is invalid.
INVALID_VALUE A value for an attribute is not formatted
correctly.
INVALID_VERSION The format of the version is invalid.
JAD_MOVED The JAD URL for an installed suite is different
than the original JAD URL.
JAD_NOT_FOUND The JAD was not found.
JAD_SERVER_NOT_FOUND The server for the JAD was not found.
JAR_CLASSES_VERIFICATION_FAILED Not all classes within JAR package can be
successfully verified with class verifier.
JAR_IS_LOCKED Component or MIDlet or IMlet suite is locked
by the system.
JAR_NOT_FOUND The JAR was not found at the URL given in the
JAD.
JAR_SERVER_NOT_FOUND The server for the JAR was not found at the
URL given in the JAD.
JAR_SIZE_MISMATCH The JAR downloaded was not the same size as
given in the JAD.
MISSING_CONFIGURATION The configuration is missing from the manifest.
MISSING_DEPENDENCY_HASH A dependency hash code is missing.
MISSING_DEPENDENCY_JAD_URL A dependency JAD URL is missing.
MISSING_JAR_SIZE The JAR size is missing.
MISSING_JAR_URL The URL for the JAR is missing.
MISSING_PROFILE The profile is missing from the manifest.
MISSING_PROVIDER_CERT The content provider certificate is missing.
MISSING_SUITE_NAME The name of MIDlet or IMlet suite is missing.
MISSING_VENDOR The vendor is missing.
InstallerErrorCode
4-10 Developer’s Guide
Table 4-4 (Cont.) Installer Error Codes
Constant Description
MISSING_VERSION The version is missing.
NEW_VERSION This suite is newer that the one currently
installed.
NO_ERROR No error.
OLD_VERSION This suite is older that the one currently
installed.
OTHER_ERROR Other errors.
PROXY_AUTH Indicates that the user must first authenticate
with the proxy.
PUSH_CLASS_FAILURE The class in a push attribute is not in MIDlet-
<n> attribute.
PUSH_DUP_FAILURE The connection in a push entry is already taken.
PUSH_FORMAT_FAILURE The format of a push attribute has an invalid
format.
PUSH_PROTO_FAILURE The connection in a push attribute is not
supported.
REVOKED_CERT The certificate has been revoked.
RMS_INITIALIZATION_FAILURE Failure to import RMS data.
SUITE_NAME_MISMATCH The MIDlet or IMlet suite name does not match
the one in the JAR manifest.
TOO_MANY_PROPS Indicates that either the JAD or manifest has
too many properties to fit into memory.
TRUSTED_OVERWRITE_FAILURE Indicates that the user tried to overwrite a
trusted suite with an untrusted suite during an
update.
UNAUTHORIZED Web server authentication failed or is required.
UNKNOWN_CA The certificate authority (CA) that issued the
content provider certificate is unknown.
UNKNOWN_CERT_STATUS The certificate is unknown to OCSP server.
UNSUPPORTED_CERT The content provider certificate has an
unsupported version.
UNSUPPORTED_CHAR_ENCODING Indicates that the character encoding specified
in the MIME type is not supported.
UNSUPPORTED_PAYMENT_INFO Indicates that the payment information
provided with the MIDlet or IMlet suite is
incompatible with the current implementation.
InstallerErrorCode
Software Management 4-11
Table 4-4 (Cont.) Installer Error Codes
Constant Description
UNTRUSTED_PAYMENT_SUITE Indicates that the MIDlet or IMlet suite has
payment provisioning information but it is not
trusted.
VENDOR_MISMATCH The vendor does not match the one in the JAR
manifest.
VERSION_MISMATCH The version does not match the one in the JAR
manifest.
InstallerErrorCode
4-12 Developer’s Guide
5
General Purpose Input/Output
This chapter describes the General Purpose Input/Output (GPIO) functionality in the
Oracle Java ME Embedded product. GPIO typically refers a generic pin on an
embedded board whose behavior, including whether it is an input or output pin, can
be programmed by the user at runtime.
GPIO pins are often lined up in rows. By design, they have no dedicated purpose, and
are used by programmers for a wide variety of tasks. For example:
• GPIO pins can be enabled or disabled.
• GPIO pins can be configured to be input or output.
• Input values are readable, often with a 1 representing a high voltage, and a 0
representing a low voltage.
• Input GPIO pins can be used as "interrupt" lines, which allow a peripheral board
connected via multiple pins to signal to the primary embedded board that it
requires attention.
• Output pin values are both readable and writable.
Warning:
Be sure to observe manufacturer's specifications and warnings carefully. For
example, with the Raspberry Pi board, the voltage value that represents a
"high" value on an input pin may be 3.3 volts (+3.3V). However, other pins
may output 5 volts (+5V). Be sure to check the manufacturer's specifications to
ensure that you are not placing too much voltage on an input GPIO line, as the
board may not have an overvoltage protection.
GPIO pins have much greater functionality than this, but it is important to start with
the basics.
Setting a GPIO Output Pin
For this example, you will need the following hardware:
Table 5-1 Hardware for GPIO Example
Hardware Where to Obtain
Raspberry Pi 512 MB Rev
B, B+, or Raspberry Pi 2
Various third-party sellers
Multimeter Various. Sinometer DT830B used in the example.
General Purpose Input/Output 5-1
Perhaps the simplest example of working with the GPIO functionality in the Oracle
Java ME Embedded product is to set the high/low value of an arbitrary output pin
and read its voltage with a multimeter. In this example, we set the value of GPIO pin 7
to alternate between high (3.3V) and low (0V) at intervals of 10 seconds and 5 seconds,
respectively. The following example shows the source code.
import jdk.dio.UnavailablePeripheralException;
import jdk.dio.DeviceManager;
import jdk.dio.gpio.GPIOPin;
import java.io.IOException;
import java.util.logging.Level;
import java.util.logging.Logger;
import javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet;
public class GPIOExample1 extends MIDlet {
 GPIOPin pin;
 public void startApp() {
 try {
 pin = (GPIOPin) DeviceManager.open(7);
 System.out.println("----------------------------------------");
 Thread.sleep(5000);
 for (int i = 0; i < 20; i++) {
 System.out.println("Setting pin to true...");
 pin.setValue(true);
 Thread.sleep(10000);
 System.out.println("Setting pin to false...");
 pin.setValue(false);
 Thread.sleep(5000);
 System.out.println("----------------------------------------");
 }
 } catch (IOException ex) {
 Logger.getLogger(GPIOExample1.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ex);
 } catch (InterruptedException ex) {
 Logger.getLogger(GPIOExample1.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ex);
 }
 }
 public void pauseApp() {
 }
 public void destroyApp(boolean unconditional) {
 try {
 pin.close();
 } catch (IOException ex) {
 Logger.getLogger(GPIOExample1.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ex);
 }
 }
}
Setting a GPIO Output Pin
5-2 Developer’s Guide
The following permissions must be added to the Application Descriptor of the IMlet
so that it will execute without any security exceptions from the Oracle Java ME
Embedded runtime.
Table 5-2 Permissions for GPIO Example
Permission Device Operation
jdk.dio.DeviceMgmtPermission GPIO7:7 open
Note that if you're using an IDE such as NetBeans as the development environment,
you will need to access the project properties of the project and set API permissions
under the application descriptor, as shown in Figure 5-1.
Figure 5-1 API Permissions in the Application Descriptor in NetBeans
After running the application, set your multimeter to read DC voltage with a
maximum of 20V, then connect one of the leads of the multimeter to GPIO 7, and the
other to GND (ground). As the application is running, note that the voltage that is read
by the multimeter will jump from its low value of around 0V after a call to
pin.setValue(false) to its high value of around 3.3V after a call to
pin.setValue(true). This is shown in Figure 5-2 and Figure 5-3.
Warning:
Remember that the GPIO pin assignments on the Raspberry Pi do not match
the pin numbers on the board. For example, GPIO 7 is not mapped to pin 7,
but instead pin 26. See Appendix A (or the hardware-appropriate Getting
Started Guide) for the pin assignments for the target boards of the Oracle Java
ME Embedded software.
Setting a GPIO Output Pin
General Purpose Input/Output 5-3
Figure 5-2 Raspberry Pi Pin 7 with Low (0V) Voltage
Figure 5-3 Raspberry Pi Pin 7 with High (3.3V) Voltage
Working with a Breadboard
When prototyping circuits, it is often helpful to have a way of connecting wires
without having to perform soldering. In some cases, if there are only a few
connections, you can use jumper wires. However, when layout out more complex
circuits, it's helpful to use a breadboard. A typical breadboard is shown in Figure 5-4.
Working with a Breadboard
5-4 Developer’s Guide
Figure 5-4 A Typical Breadboard
A breadboard consists of a large number of holes, each of which are wired together on
the bottom using a standardized pattern, such as the one shown in Figure 5-5. Note
that the two columns on both the left and the right of the breadboard are wired
vertically--these provide power (+) and ground (-) connections that can be tapped into
to. The horizontal rows on either side of the center line, on the other hand, are used to
create circuits. Circuits can be created using small wires with metal tips on each end
that can "plug into" the holes.
Working with a Breadboard
General Purpose Input/Output 5-5
Figure 5-5 Wiring Pattern for a Typical Breadboard
For the Raspberry Pi, we can connect the GPIO pins on the Pi to a breadboard using a
device called a T-Cobbler Extension Board. This device attaches a ribbon cable to the
GPIO pins, which in turn connects to the T-cobbler board. The T-cobbler board is then
inserted into the top of the breadboard, as shown in Figure 5-6.
Working with a Breadboard
5-6 Developer’s Guide
Figure 5-6 T-Cobbler Extension Board for the Raspberry Pi
Once connected to the Pi, you can use any of the holes running along the red stripe on
the left side of the breadboard to provide +3.3 volts (3V3), or any of the holes running
along the red stripe on the right side of the breadboard to provide +5 volts (5V0). In
addition, any of the holes running along the blue stripes on either side of the board
connect to the ground (GND) on the Raspberry Pi.
The GPIO pins on the Raspberry Pi map to the pins on the T-cobbler (and hence the
respective horizontal rows on the breadboard) as shown in Figure 5-3.
Working with a Breadboard
General Purpose Input/Output 5-7
Table 5-3 Broadcom GPIO to T-Cobbler Conversion
GPIO (Pi Pin Number) Alternate Name
2 (Pin 3) SDA
3 (Pin 5) SCL
4 (Pin 7) P7
7 (Pin 26) CE1
8 (Pin 24) CE0
9 (Pin 21) MISO
10 (Pin 19) MOSI
11 (Pin 23) SCLK
14 (Pin 8) TXD
15 (Pin 10) RXD
18 (Pin 12) P1
22 (Pin 15) P3
23 (Pin 16) P4
24 (Pin 18) P5
25 (Pin 22) P6
27 (Pin 13) P2
Blinking an LED
We can use the code in the first example to create a small circuit on the breadboard
that turns on an off a light-emitting diode (LED). For this example, you will need the
following equipment.
Table 5-4 Equipment Needed for Blinking LED Example
Hardware Where to Obtain
LED Any electronics store
1000 ohm resistor Any electronics store
T-Cobbler and Breadboard Adafruit
Jumper Wires (Male to
Male)
Adafruit
Use the breadboard to connect one end of a 1000-ohm resistor to a row that connects to
GPIO7, which is marked on the T-Cobbler by CE1. Plug the other end of the 1000-ohm
Blinking an LED
5-8 Developer’s Guide
resistor into an unused row further down the breadboard. Then, run an LED from that
row an adjacent row, and then connect that row to the ground (GND). The circuit
should look similar to the schematic in Figure 5-7.
Figure 5-7 Schematic for Wiring an LED to GPIO 7
When completed, you should have a prototype that looks like Figure 5-8. Run the first
example again, and you should see the LED light blinking off an on whenever the
setValue(true) call is made on the GPIOPin object.
Note:
Remember that an LED is a diode, which by definition only allows current to
travel one way through it. If your LED does not light up when the voltage is
applied, try flipping the connections so that the current travels the reverse
direction through the diode.
Blinking an LED
General Purpose Input/Output 5-9
Figure 5-8 Wiring an LED to GPIO Pin 7
Testing Output and Input Pins
Our next GPIO example will take the output voltage from one pin and redirect it back
to an adjacent input pin, while creating a listener on the input pin that reacts
accordingly. For this example, you will need the following hardware:
Testing Output and Input Pins
5-10 Developer’s Guide
Table 5-5 Hardware for Example 1-1
Hardware Where to Obtain
Raspberry Pi 512 MB Rev B Various third-party sellers
Multimeter Various. Sinometer DT830B used in the example.
Here, we use GPIO 8 and 11 on the Raspberry Pi due to their proximity to each other.
These pins are right next to GPIO 7 and GND, which was used in the previous
example. In the example below, we've added a listener to an input pin that will trigger
whenever the input voltage changes in both directions (high-to-low and low-to-high).
import jdk.dio.UnavailablePeripheralException;
import jdk.dio.DeviceManager;
import jdk.dio.gpio.GPIOPin;
import jdk.dio.gpio.PinEvent;
import jdk.dio.gpio.PinListener;
import java.io.IOException;
import java.util.logging.Level;
import java.util.logging.Logger;
import javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet;
public class GPIOExample2 extends MIDlet {
 GPIOPin pin8;
 GPIOPin pin11;
 public void startApp() {
 try {
 pin8 = (GPIOPin) DeviceManager.open(8); // Output pin by default
 pin11 = (GPIOPin) DeviceManager.open(11); // Input pin by default
 pin11.setInputListener(new MyPinListener());
 System.out.println("----------------------------------------");
 Thread.sleep(5000);
 for (int i = 0; i < 20; i++) {
 System.out.println("Setting pin 8 to true...");
 pin8.setValue(true);
 Thread.sleep(10000);
 System.out.println("Setting pin 8 to false...");
 pin8.setValue(false);
 Thread.sleep(5000);
 System.out.println("----------------------------------------");
 }
 } catch (IOException ex) {
 Logger.getLogger(GPIOExample2.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ex);
 } catch (InterruptedException ex) {
 Logger.getLogger(GPIOExample2.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ex);
 }
 }
Testing Output and Input Pins
General Purpose Input/Output 5-11
 public void pauseApp() {
 }
 public void destroyApp(boolean unconditional) {
 try {
 pin8.close();
 pin11.close();
 } catch (IOException ex) {
 Logger.getLogger(GPIOExample2.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ex);
 }
 }

 class MyPinListener implements PinListener {
 @Override
 public void valueChanged(PinEvent event) {
 try {
 System.out.println("Pin listener for pin 11 has been called!");
 System.out.println("Pin 11 is now " + pin11.getValue());
 } catch (IOException ex) {
 Logger.getLogger(GPIOExample2.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ex);
 }
 }

 }
}
Table 5-6 shows the permission that must be added to the Application Descriptor of
the IMlet so that it will execute without any security exceptions from the Oracle Java
ME Embedded runtime.
Table 5-6 Permissions for Example 1-2
Permission Device Operation
jdk.dio.DeviceMgmtPermission *:* open
After running the application, either connect one of the leads of the multimeter to the
GPIO 8 pin and the other to the GPIO 11 pin of the Raspberry Pi (or create a
compatible circuit on a breadboard). Set your multimeter to read DCV with a
maximum of 200 mV. As the application is running, note that the voltage that is read
by the multimeter will jump from its low value to its high voltage, although the
voltages will be much smaller than that from GPIO 7. Try disconnecting the lead from
GPIO 11 momentarily and reconnecting it when GPIO 8 is high. The output of the
program should reflect that the listener is called both when the lead is released, and
when it is reconnected.
Warning:
Remember that the GPIO pin assignments on the Raspberry Pi do not match
the pin numbers on the board. For example, GPIO 8 is not mapped to pin 8,
but instead pin 24. Likewise, GPIO 11 is mapped to pin 23. See Appendix A
Testing Output and Input Pins
5-12 Developer’s Guide
and Appendix B for the pin assignments for the target boards of the Oracle
Java ME Embedded software.
The output of the application when running in NetBeans is shown in Figure 5-9.
Figure 5-9 Output of Example 1-2
Testing Output and Input Pins
General Purpose Input/Output 5-13
Testing Output and Input Pins
5-14 Developer’s Guide
6
Working with the I2C Bus
The I2C bus, often referred to as "i-2-c" or "i-squared-c", is a low-speed bus frequently
used between micro-controllers and peripherals. I2C uses only two bi-directional lines,
Serial Data Line (SDA) and Serial Clock (SCL), often pulled-up with resistors. Typical
voltages used are +5 V or +3.3 V, although systems with other voltages are permitted.
When using the Raspberry Pi, be sure to check the manufacturer's specifications as to
which voltages are acceptable for powering the peripheral. The Raspberry Pi provides
both 3.3V and 5V pins.
To enable I2C on the Raspberry Pi, add the following lines to the /etc/modules files
and reboot. Note that the file will need to be edited with root privileges.
 i2c-bcm2708
 i2c-dev
Experimenting with a 7-Segment Display
For this exercise, you will need the following hardware:
Table 6-1 Hardware for 7-Segment Display Example
Hardware Where to Obtain
Raspberry Pi 512 MB Rev
B, B+, or Raspberry Pi 2
Various third-party sellers
Adafruit .56" 4-digit 7-
segment display with
HT16K33 I2C Backpack
Adafuit or Amazon. Requires a small amount of soldering of
the LED display unit to I2C logic board, as well as 4 I2C
connector pins.
Jumper Wires - Female to
Female (x4)
Electronics store. We used SchmartBoard P/N 920-0065-01 Rev
A
Our first example allows us to use the GPIO2 and GPIO3 pins for the I2C data and
clock connections. Using these connections, we will write a simple program that
allows us to set the display using an I2C connection.
In order to hook up the 7-Segment display to the Raspberry Pi properly, the jumper
wires must be connected as shown in Table 6-2. Note that because there are only four
connections, we opted not to use a T-cobber and a breadboard in this example.
Table 6-2 Raspberry Pi to HT16K33 Jumper Connections
Pins on Raspberry Pi HT16K33 Board
5V (Pin 2) VCC
Working with the I2C Bus 6-1
Table 6-2 (Cont.) Raspberry Pi to HT16K33 Jumper Connections
Pins on Raspberry Pi HT16K33 Board
Ground (Pin 6) GND
GPIO 2 (Pin 3) SDA (Serial Data)
GPIO 3 (Pin 5) SCL (Serial Clock)
First, we need a basic class that communicates with the HT16K33 "LED backpack" that
is soldered to the actual 7-segment LED display. The following example shows the
source code for the 7-segment I2C display driver.
import jdk.dio.DeviceManager;
import jdk.dio.i2cbus.I2CDevice;
import jdk.dio.i2cbus.I2CDeviceConfig;
import java.io.IOException;
import java.nio.ByteBuffer;
import java.util.logging.Level;
import java.util.logging.Logger;
public class LEDBackpack {
 I2CDeviceConfig LEDBackpackConfig;
 int[] displaybuffer = new int[10];
 byte[] OSCILLATOR_ON = {0x21};
 byte BRIGHTNESS = (byte) 0xE0;
 static byte HT16K33_BLINK_CMD = (byte) 0x80;
 static byte HT16K33_BLINK_DISPLAYON = (byte) 0x01;
 static byte HT16K33_BLINK_OFF = (byte) 0;
 static byte HT16K33_BLINK_2HZ = (byte) 1;
 static byte HT16K33_BLINK_1HZ = (byte) 2;
 static byte HT16K33_BLINK_HALFHZ = (byte) 3;
 static byte LETTER_J = 0x1E;
 static byte LETTER_A = 0x77;
 static byte LETTER_V = 0x3E;
 static final byte numbertable[] = {
 0x3F, /* 0 */
 0x06, /* 1 */
 0x5B, /* 2 */
 0x4F, /* 3 */
 0x66, /* 4 */
 0x6D, /* 5 */
 0x7D, /* 6 */
 0x07, /* 7 */
 0x7F, /* 8 */
 0x6F, /* 9 */
 0x77, /* a */
 0x7C, /* b */
 0x39, /* C */
 0x5E, /* d */
 0x79, /* E */
Experimenting with a 7-Segment Display
6-2 Developer’s Guide
 0x71, /* F */};
 public LEDBackpack() {
 LEDBackpackConfig = new I2CDeviceConfig(1, 0x70, 7, 100000);
 }
 void begin() {
 try (I2CDevice slave = DeviceManager.open(LEDBackpackConfig)) {
 ByteBuffer oscOnCmd = ByteBuffer.wrap(OSCILLATOR_ON);
 slave.write(oscOnCmd);
 slave.close();
 } catch (IOException ioe) {
 Logger.getLogger(LEDBackpack.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ioe);
 }
 setBlinkRate(HT16K33_BLINK_OFF);
 setBrightness(15);
 }
 void setBrightness(int b) {
 if (b > 15) {
 b = 15;
 } else if (b < 0) {
 b = 0;
 }
 byte[] ea = {(byte) (BRIGHTNESS | b)};
 try (I2CDevice slave = DeviceManager.open(LEDBackpackConfig)) {
 ByteBuffer brightnessCmd = ByteBuffer.wrap(ea);
 slave.write(brightnessCmd);
 slave.close();
 } catch (IOException ioe) {
 Logger.getLogger(LEDBackpack.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ioe);
 }
 }
 void setBlinkRate(int b) {
 if (b > 3) {
 b = 0; // turn off if not sure
 } else if (b < 0) {
 b = 0;
 }
 byte[] ea =
 {(byte) (HT16K33_BLINK_CMD | HT16K33_BLINK_DISPLAYON | (b << 1))};
 try (I2CDevice slave = DeviceManager.open(LEDBackpackConfig)) {
 ByteBuffer blinkRateCmd = ByteBuffer.wrap(ea);
 slave.write(blinkRateCmd);
Experimenting with a 7-Segment Display
Working with the I2C Bus 6-3
 slave.close();
 } catch (IOException ioe) {
 Logger.getLogger(LEDBackpack.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ioe);
 }
 }
 void writeDisplay() {
 try (I2CDevice slave = DeviceManager.open(LEDBackpackConfig)) {
 byte start[] = {0x00};
 ByteBuffer startCmd = ByteBuffer.wrap(start);
 slave.write(0x00, 1, startCmd);
 for (int i = 0; i < displaybuffer.length; i++) {
 byte b1a[] = {(byte) (displaybuffer[i] & 0xFF)};
 ByteBuffer b1Cmd = ByteBuffer.wrap(b1a);
 slave.write(i, 1, b1Cmd);
 }
 slave.close();
 } catch (IOException ioe) {
 Logger.getLogger(LEDBackpack.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ioe);
 }
 }
 void clear() {
 for (int i = 0; i < displaybuffer.length; i++) {
 displaybuffer[i] = 0;
 }
 }
}
This driver class contains five methods: begin(), setBrightness(),
setBlinkRate(), writeDisplay(), and clear(). Let's cover each of these in
more detail.
The begin() method will initialize the display. There are three operations that must
be performed to do this properly. First, the oscillator on the HT16K33 LED backboard
must be turned on. We can do this by sending a byte value of hex 0x21 across the bus.
Next, we set the blink rate of the 7-segment display to one of four values: OFF, 2 Hz, 1
Hz, or .5 Hz. Finally, we can set the brightness of the display using a value of 1 to 15.
For the latter two operations, we make use of the next two methods which can also be
called independently.
The setBlinkRate() and setBrightness() methods simply take an input value,
perform bounds checking, and calculate the correct byte value to send across the bus.
Just like turning on the oscillator, we only need to send one byte across the bus to
modify the blink rate or brightness to any level we choose.
The writeDisplay() method, on the other hand, is a little more complex. Here, the
class makes use of an array of 10 integers, declared as a field, that serves as a display
Experimenting with a 7-Segment Display
6-4 Developer’s Guide
buffer. In reality, the writeDisplay() method will truncate any value larger then
255 before sending it across the bus, but making it an array of integers is helpful for
the user.
Each of the entries in the array will map to an address on the HT16K33 "LED
backpack" that can be written to using the I2C bus. The purpose of each of the
addresses is shown in Table 6-3. Note that since the HT16K33 can drive different types
of LED displays, several of the addresses are ignored when using this particular 4-
character 7-segment display.
Table 6-3 HT16K33 7-Segment Display Addresses
Address Purpose
0x00 7-Segment Display Character 1 and Period
0x01 Ignored
0x02 7-Segment Display Character 2 and Period
0x03 Ignored
0x04 Colon (0xFF for colon on; 0x00 for colon off)
0x05 Ignored
0x06 7-Segment Display Character 3 and Period
0x07 Ignored
0x08 7-Segment Display Character 4 and Period
0x09 Ignored
Each address can have one byte written to it. The contents of each byte is mapped out
in binary as shown in Figure 6-1. As such, the number 7 with a decimal point is
represented in binary as 10000111, which is equal to 0x87 in hexadecimal. Note that
address 0x04 is reserved for the colon that appears between the first two numbers and
the second two numbers in the display; it does not represent character 3.
Figure 6-1 Binary Encoding for 7-Segment Display
The following example shows a sample IMlet that will write the word "JAVA",
without any decimal points or colon, to the display (even though the "V" looks the
same as a "U" in the 7-segment display).
import javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet;
Experimenting with a 7-Segment Display
Working with the I2C Bus 6-5
public class I2CExample1 extends MIDlet {

 public void startApp() {

 LEDBackpack backpack = new LEDBackpack();

 backpack.begin();
 backpack.setBrightness(10);
 backpack.setBlinkRate(LEDBackpack.HT16K33_BLINK_OFF);
 backpack.clear();
 backpack.writeDisplay();

 backpack.displaybuffer[0] = LEDBackpack.LETTER_J;
 backpack.displaybuffer[2] = LEDBackpack.LETTER_A;
 backpack.displaybuffer[4] = 0x00; // No colon
 backpack.displaybuffer[6] = LEDBackpack.LETTER_V;
 backpack.displaybuffer[8] = LEDBackpack.LETTER_A;
 backpack.writeDisplay();
 }

 public void pauseApp() {
 }

 public void destroyApp(boolean unconditional) {
 }
}
The following permissions must be added to the Application Descriptor of the project
so that it will execute without any security exceptions from the Oracle Java ME
Embedded runtime.
Table 6-4 API Permissions for 7-Segment Display Project
Permission Device Operation
jdk.dio.DeviceMgmtPermission *:* open
jdk.dio.i2cbus.I2CPinPermission *:* open
After running the application, you should see the display as shown in Figure 6-2.
Experimenting with a 7-Segment Display
6-6 Developer’s Guide
Figure 6-2 Result of Running the 7-Segment Display IMlet
Experimenting with a 16x2 LCD Display
For this exercise, you will need the following hardware:
Table 6-5 Hardware for Example 2-2
Hardware Where to Obtain
Raspberry Pi 512 MB Rev
B, B+, or Raspberry Pi 2
Various third-party sellers
16x2 LCD Display with an
HD44780 Controller
Amazon. Requires a small amount of soldering for the 16
connector pins that run on the top of the logic board.
PCF8574N 8-bit I/O
Expander Chip
Mouser Electronics.
T-Cobbler and Breadboard Electronics store.
Jumper Wires Electronics store
This example uses the I2C bus to interface to an LCD display with a Hitachi HD44780
backboard. The HD44780-based 16x2 character LCDs are inexpensive and widely
available. However, in addition to the LCD display, we must also use a PCF8574-
based IC, which is an general purpose bidirectional 8 bit I/O port expander that uses
the I2C protocol.
The first step is to hook up the Raspberry Pi to the PCF8574 chip. Typically, an IC chip
is installed on a breadboard vertically along the center aisle, with the pins from the IC
Experimenting with a 16x2 LCD Display
Working with the I2C Bus 6-7
connecting to the holes adjacent to the center. The pinouts for the PCF8574N IC are
shown in Figure 6-3.
Figure 6-3 Pinout Diagram for PCF8574N IC
Once the chip is on the breadboard, there are several pins on the chip that must be
connected to the T-Cobbler using jumper wires, as shown in Table 6-6.
Table 6-6 Raspberry Pi to PCF8574N Jumper Connections
Pins on T-Cobbler (Pi) PCF8574N Pins
+5V (Pin 2) VCC
GND (Pin 6) GND
SDA / GPIO 2 (Pin 3) SDA (Serial Data)
SCL / GPIO 3 (Pin 5) SCL (Serial Clock)
GND (Pin 6) A0
GND (Pin 6) A1
GND (Pin 6) A2
The first four pins shown in are the standard I2C connections that are required of any
slave device that wishes to use the I2C bus. However, the remaining 3 pins are used to
set the slave address on I2C bus #1, represented as a binary digit from 0-7 (A0=1,
A1=2, A2=4) that is added to the hexidecimal value of 0x20. Because we are not
running voltage on any of these pins, the address of the PCF8574N chip on the I2C bus
should remain 0x20. If you'd like to verify this, login to the Raspberry Pi and issue the
command shown in Figure 6-4. Here, the i2cdetect command shows that on bus 1
there is a device at address 0x20. To change the address, try connecting a 10K resistor
between the 5V pin and one of the Ax pins and rerunning the command. The address
that is reported should change accordingly.
Experimenting with a 16x2 LCD Display
6-8 Developer’s Guide
Figure 6-4 Running the i2cdetect Command
The remaining pins P0-P7 and INT (high) on the PCF8574N are used to communicate
with other devices, in this case the HD44780 chip that drives the 16x2 LCD display.
Table 6-7 shows the connections to and the PCF8574N chip.
Table 6-7 Connections to PCF8574N Chip
Raspberry Pi (T-Cobbler) PCF8574N
SCL / GPIO 3 (Pin 5) SCL
SDA / GPIO 2 (Pin 3) SDA
GND (Pin 6) A0 (see discussion on I2C address above)
GND (Pin 6) A1
GND (Pin 6) A2
+5V (Pin 2) VDD
GND (Pin 6) VSS
Table 6-8 shows the connections between the PCF8574N chip and the HD44780
controller.
Table 6-8 Connection Between PCF8574N Chip and HD44780 Controller
PCF8574N HD44780
P0 DB4
P1 DB5
P2 DB6
Experimenting with a 16x2 LCD Display
Working with the I2C Bus 6-9
Table 6-8 (Cont.) Connection Between PCF8574N Chip and HD44780 Controller
PCF8574N HD44780
P3 DB7
P4 RS
P5 R/W
P6 E
Table 6-9 shows connection between the T-Cobbler and the HD44780 controller.
Table 6-9 Connection to HD44780 Chip
Raspberry Pi (T-Cobbler) HD44780
+5V (Pin 2) VDD
0 to +5V VO (variable resistor if desired for dimming
backlit display)
GND (Pin 6) VSS
Before connecting the Px lines on the IC, try placing a resistor and an LED on a line
coming from the P0 pin. Then, run the code shown in the following example.
import javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet;
import jdk.dio.DeviceManager;
import jdk.dio.i2cbus.I2CDevice;
import jdk.dio.i2cbus.I2CDeviceConfig;
import java.io.IOException;
public class IOExpanderExample extends MIDlet {
 public void startApp() {

 LEDBackpackConfig = new I2CDeviceConfig(1, 0x20, 7, 100000);
 try (I2CDevice slave = DeviceManager.open(LEDBackpackConfig))
 {
 slave.write((byte)0x01);
 } catch (IOException ex) {
 // Handle exception
 }
 }
 public void pauseApp() {
 }
 public void destroyApp(boolean unconditional) {
 }
Experimenting with a 16x2 LCD Display
6-10 Developer’s Guide
}
To understand this example, it helps to look at the data line dialog, as shown in Figure
6-5. Each of the Px lines can be activated or deactivated by writing a binary number to
the slave device, where P7 represents the most-significant digit and P0 represents the
least-significant digit. Writing a value of 0x01 to the slave device will activate only the
P0 line, which should in turn make the LED that is connected to it light up (be sure
that the LED's cathode and anode connected are the right direction and that there is a
resistor in line so the LED does not burn out!). Note that the LED will remain lit until a
new value is written to the bus, or the PCF8574N chip loses power.
Figure 6-5 I/O Data Bus with the PCF8574N chip
Next, complete the circuit according to Table 6-7. The following shows a sample driver
class that will control the HD44780.
import javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet;
import jdk.dio.DeviceManager;
import jdk.dio.i2cbus.I2CDevice;
import jdk.dio.i2cbus.I2CDeviceConfig;
import java.io.IOException;
import java.util.logging.Level;
import java.util.logging.Logger;
public class LCDDisplay {
 I2CDeviceConfig LEDBackpackConfig;
 I2CDevice slave;
 public LCDDisplay()
 throws InterruptedException, IOException {
 LEDBackpackConfig = new I2CDeviceConfig(1, 0x20, 7, 100000);
 slave = DeviceManager.open(LEDBackpackConfig);
 }
 public void begin()
 throws InterruptedException, IOException {
 slave.write(0x03);
 byte result1 = (byte) slave.read();
 Thread.sleep(5);
 slave.write(0x03);
 byte result2 = (byte) slave.read();
 Thread.sleep(1);
 slave.write(0x03);
 byte result3 = (byte) slave.read();
 Thread.sleep(1);
Experimenting with a 16x2 LCD Display
Working with the I2C Bus 6-11
 slave.write(0x02);
 byte result4 = (byte) slave.read();
 writeCommand((byte) 0x28);
 writeCommand((byte) 0x08);
 writeCommand((byte) 0x01);
 writeCommand((byte) 0x06);
 writeCommand((byte) 0x0C);
 Thread.sleep(1);
 byte result5 = (byte) slave.read();
 }
 public void writeCharacter(byte charvalue)
 throws InterruptedException, IOException {
 slave.write((byte) (0x10 | (charvalue >> 4)));
 strobe();
 slave.write((byte) (0x10 | (charvalue & 0x0F)));
 strobe();
 slave.write(0x00);
 Thread.sleep(1);
 }
 public void writeCommand(byte value)
 throws InterruptedException, IOException {
 slave.write((byte) (value >> 4));
 strobe();
 slave.write((byte) (value & 0x0F));
 strobe();
 slave.write(0x00);
 Thread.sleep(5);
 }
 public void writeString(int line, String string)
 throws InterruptedException, IOException {
 if (line == 1) {
 writeCommand((byte) 0x80);
 } else if (line == 2) {
 writeCommand((byte) 0xC0);
 } else if (line == 3) {
 writeCommand((byte) 0x94);
 } else if (line == 4) {
 writeCommand((byte) 0xD4);
 }
 char[] chars = string.toCharArray();
 for (int i = 0; i < chars.length; i++) {
 writeCharacter((byte) chars[i]);
 }
 }
 public void strobe()
 throws InterruptedException, IOException {
Experimenting with a 16x2 LCD Display
6-12 Developer’s Guide
 Thread.sleep(1);
 byte readResult = (byte) slave.read();
 readResult |= 0x40;
 slave.write(readResult);
 Thread.sleep(1);
 readResult = (byte) slave.read();
 readResult &= 0xBF;
 slave.write(readResult);
 }
 public void clear()
 throws InterruptedException, IOException {
 Thread.sleep(5);
 writeCommand((byte) 0x01);
 Thread.sleep(5);
 writeCommand((byte) 0x02);
 Thread.sleep(5);
 }
 public void end()
 throws IOException {
 slave.close();
 }
}
To use the driver class, run the IMlet shown in the following example.
import java.io.IOException;
import javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet;
public class I2CExample2 extends MIDlet {
 public void startApp() {
 LCDDisplay display;
 try {
 display = new LCDDisplay();
 display.begin();
 display.clear();
 display.writeString(1, "Java ME");
 display.writeString(2, "Embedded");
 display.end();
 } catch (InterruptedException ex) {
 ex.printStackTrace();
 } catch (IOException ex) {
 ex.printStackTrace();
 }
Experimenting with a 16x2 LCD Display
Working with the I2C Bus 6-13
 }
 public void pauseApp() {
 }
 public void destroyApp(boolean unconditional) {
 }
}
The following permissions must be added to the Application Descriptor of the project
so that it will execute without any security exceptions from the Oracle Java ME
Embedded runtime.
Table 6-10 API Permissions for LCD Example
Permission Device Operation
jdk.dio.DeviceMgmtPermission *:* open
jdk.dio.i2cbus.I2CPinPermission *:* open
After running the application, you should see the display as shown in Figure 6-6.
Figure 6-6 LCD Display after Running Example
Experimenting with a 16x2 LCD Display
6-14 Developer’s Guide
7
The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) Bus
The Serial Peripheral Interface or SPI bus is a synchronous serial data link that
operates in full duplex mode. In other words, data can be sent and received at the
same time. Devices communicate in master/slave mode, where the master device
initiates the data exchange with one or more slaves. Multiple slave devices are allowed
with individual slave select lines.
The SPI bus specifies four logic signals:
• SCLK : Serial Clock (a clock signal that is sent from the master).
• MOSI : Master Output, Slave Input (data sent from the master to the slave).
• MISO : Master Input, Slave Output (data sent from the slave to the master).
• SS : Slave Select (sent from the master, active on low signal). Often paired with the
Chip Select (CS) line on an integrated circuit that supports SPI.
In order to enable the SPI bus on the Raspberry Pi, uncomment the entry
spi_bcm2708 in the file /etc/modprobe.d/raspi-blacklist.conf. Note that
you will need to have root privileges to edit the file.
Using the SPI Bus to Communicate with an ADC
Because the Raspberry Pi board does not come with a analog-to-digital converter, the
SPI bus can be used to communicate with a peripheral analog-to-digital converter chip
that is reading an analog signal.
For this exercise, you will need the following hardware:
Table 7-1 Hardware for Example 3-1
Hardware Where to Obtain
Raspberry Pi 512 MB Rev B Various third-party sellers
Texas Instruments
TLC549CP 8-bit ADC
Various electronics suppliers. We used mouser.com.
T-Cobbler and Breadboard Adafuit. See Chapter 1 for more information.
Potentiometer Electronics store
Jumper Wires (M/M and
F/F)
Electronics store.
The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) Bus 7-1
The data sheet of the TLC549CP shows 8 pins, as shown in Figure 7-1. Note that the
SPI connections reside on the right side of the chip, while the connections for
measuring the analog signal are on the left side of the chip.
Figure 7-1 Pinouts for TLC549CP Analog-to-Digital Converter Chip
In order to connect the TLC549CP chip to the Raspberry Pi, the SPI connections must
be connected as shown in Table 7-2.
Table 7-2 Raspberry Pi to TLC549CP SPI Pins
Pins on Raspberry Pi TLC549CP ADC Board Pins (Right Side)
3.3V VCC
SCLK (GPIO 11 / Pin 23) CLK
MISO (GPIO 9/ Pin 21) Data
CE0 (GPIO 8 / Pin 24) CS
The other four pins must be connected to provide the analog voltage to measure. In
this example, we are using a potentiometer (in effect, a variable resistor) to vary the
amount of voltage being sent into the Analog In pin.
Table 7-3 shows how to connect the remaining pins on the TCL549CP chip.
Table 7-3 TLC549CP to Analog Signal Pins
TLC549CP ADC Board
Pins (Left Side)
Analog Signal
Vref+ Voltage (Side Pin on Potentiometer) / 3.3V
Analog In Variable Voltage Signal (Middle Pin on Potentiometer)
Vref- Voltage (Other Side Pin on Potentiometer)
GND To Ground
Note that in order to complete our circuit and provide power to the potentiometer, the
Vref+ must be also connected to a 3.3V input, and the Vref- must be connected to a
ground. The chip does not provide voltage. You can test the voltage that is being sent
through the potentiometer with a voltmeter to ensure that the circuit is working
properly. The completed circuit on the breadboard is shown in Figure 7-2.
Using the SPI Bus to Communicate with an ADC
7-2 Developer’s Guide
Figure 7-2 Breadboard with the Analog-to-Digital Converter Circuit
Once this is completed, we can use the source code in the following example to test
out the ADC chip.
import jdk.dio.Device;
import jdk.dio.DeviceManager;
import jdk.dio.spibus.SPIDevice;
import jdk.dio.spibus.SPIDeviceConfig;
import java.io.IOException;
import java.nio.ByteBuffer;
import java.util.logging.Level;
import java.util.logging.Logger;
Using the SPI Bus to Communicate with an ADC
The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) Bus 7-3
import javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet;
public class SPIExample1 extends MIDlet {
 public void startApp() {
 System.out.println("Preparing to open SPI device...");

 SPIDeviceConfig config = new SPIDeviceConfig(0, 0,
 SPIDeviceConfig.CS_ACTIVE_LOW,
 500000,
 3,
 8,
 Peripheral.BIG_ENDIAN);

 try (SPIDevice slave = (SPIDevice)DeviceManager.open(config)) {
 System.out.println("SPI device opened.");

 for (int i = 1; i < 200; i++) {
 ByteBuffer sndBuf = ByteBuffer.wrap(new byte[]{0x00});
 ByteBuffer rcvBuf = ByteBuffer.wrap(new byte[1]);
 slave.writeAndRead(sndBuf,rcvBuf);
 System.out.println("Analog to digital conversion at " +
 i + " is: " + rcvBuf.get(0));
 Thread.sleep(1000);
 }
 } catch (IOException ioe) {
 // handle exception
 } catch (InterruptedException ex) {
 Logger.getLogger(SPIExample1.class.getName()).
 log(Level.SEVERE, null, ex);
 }
 }
 public void pauseApp() {
 }
 public void destroyApp(boolean unconditional) {
 }
}
This program is very simple: it opens up a connection to the Raspbeery Pi SPI bus
using a SPIDeviceConfig and writes a byte to the peripheral device: the ADC chip.
Since there is no input connection being sent from the master (the Raspberry Pi) to the
slave (the ADC chip), this data is effectively ignored. The SPI bus will, concurrently,
attempt to retrieve a byte of data from the chip. This byte is passed along the MISO
line, which returns an 8-bit number that represents the current voltage level. This
process will be repeated 200 times, with a one-second delay between each sampling on
the bus.
The program output looks like the following. As the program is running, try turning
the dial on the potentiometer to vary the voltage that is being sent into the chip. Here,
we are turning the voltage from higher to lower, and the ADC chip is representing this
with a steady drop in the 8-bit value that is returned.
Using the SPI Bus to Communicate with an ADC
7-4 Developer’s Guide
Starting emulator in execution mode
...
About the open device
Device opened...
Value for 1 is: 145
Value for 2 is: 143
Value for 3 is: 120
Value for 4 is: 113
Value for 5 is: 90
Value for 6 is: 75
Value for 7 is: 63
Using the SPI Bus to Communicate with an ADC
The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) Bus 7-5
Using the SPI Bus to Communicate with an ADC
7-6 Developer’s Guide
8
Working with Java ME Encryption
Learn about the the encryption functionality available to the Java ME Embedded
programmer with the Oracle Java ME Embedded 8.3 release.
Topics:
• Connecting to an SSL Server
• Authenticating an SSL Server
• Accessing the Keystore
• Configuring the Board as a Secure Server
Connecting to an SSL Server
Creating a connection to an SSL server only requires the programmer to include an
appropriate ConnectionOption object in the call to Connector.open(). This
example requires the following hardware:
Table 8-1 Hardware for Example 1-1
Hardware Where to Obtain
Raspberry Pi 512 MB Rev
B, B+, or Raspberry Pi 2
Various third-party sellers
In this example, we use the Oracle Java ME Embedded runtime to connect to a server
on the network that is running TLSv1.1 or higher on port 443. Note that this example
requires the user to configure a web server that will accept an incoming connection on
that port and uses the proper protocol and is properly signed by a valid certificate
authority. After this is setup, the value of the sTestServerAddr variable should be
changed accordingly. The following example shows the source code.
import java.io.DataInputStream;
import java.io.DataOutputStream;
import java.io.IOException;
import java.io.InputStream;
import java.io.OutputStream;
import javax.microedition.io.ConnectionOption;
import javax.microedition.io.Connector;
import javax.microedition.io.SecureConnection;
import javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet;
public class SSLConnect extends MIDlet {
 @Override
Working with Java ME Encryption 8-1
 public void startApp() {
 SecureConnection sc;
 ConnectionOption<String> protocol;
 InputStream is;
 OutputStream os;
 DataInputStream dis;
 DataOutputStream dos;

 String sTestServerAddr = "example.com:443";

 try {

 protocol = new ConnectionOption<>("Protocol", "TLSv1.1");
 sc = (SecureConnection) Connector.open("ssl://" +
 sTestServerAddr, protocol);

 System.out.println("Connection successful to:");
 System.out.println("Address: " + sc.getAddress());
 System.out.println("Port: " + sc.getPort());
 System.out.println("Cipher Suite: " +
 sc.getSecurityInfo().getCipherSuite());
 System.out.println("Protocol Name: " +
 sc.getSecurityInfo().getProtocolName());
 System.out.println("Protocol Version: " +
 sc.getSecurityInfo().getProtocolVersion());
 } catch (IOException ex) {
 ex.printStackTrace();
 }
 }
 @Override
 public void pauseApp() {
 }
 @Override
 public void destroyApp(boolean unconditional) {
 }
}
The following permissions must be added to the Application Descriptor of the IMlet
so that it will execute without any security exceptions from the Oracle Java ME
Embedded runtime.
Table 8-2 Permissions for Example 4-1
Permission Device
javax.microedition.io.SSLProtocolPermission ssl://*:*
javax.microedition.io.SocketProtocolPermission socket://*:*
Note that if you're using an IDE such as NetBeans as the development environment,
you will need to access the project properties of the project and set API permissions
under the application descriptor, as shown in Figure 8-1.
Connecting to an SSL Server
8-2 Developer’s Guide
Figure 8-1 API Permissions in the Project Properties Dialog in NetBeans
Tip:
If your server does not currently use a certificate from a signed certificate
authority (CA), you can import a server certificate to the Java ME Embedded
device. Locate the MEKeytool executable in the bin directory of the Oracle
Java ME Embedded SDK distribution, and enter the following command
using a Windows command prompt.
C:\SDK\bin> mekeytool.exe -import -Xdevice:EmbeddedExternalDevice1 -keystore
myCert.crt
This command will connect to the keystore on the embedded device currently
recognized by the Device Manager as "EmbeddedExternalDevice1" and install
the certificate with the filename myCert.crt. Note that this certificate must
be identical to the one residing on the server that is authenticating SSL/TLS
connections, or the Java embedded runtime will throw a
javax.microedition.pki.CertificateException when attempting a
secure connection. See Appendix D for more information on using the
MEKeyTool utility.
After running the application, you should see output that identifies a successful
connection to the server at the address and port specified. The program will then
output the address and port, as well as the security connection parameters that were
used to make the connection.
Connection successful to:Address: 192.168.1.125Port: 443Cipher Suite:
TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHAProtocol Name: TLSProtocol Version: 3.2
Connecting to an SSL Server
Working with Java ME Encryption 8-3
Authenticating an SSL Server
In this example, we expand on the ConnectionOption objects to provide an option
to authenticate an HTTPS server. As with the previous example, the value of the
serverAddr variable should be modified to point to a properly configured server.
The following example shows the source code.
Note:
Oracle Java ME Embedded 8.2 has removed support for SSLv3 due to a
widely-publicized security vulnerability. However, the source code example is
applicable to other forms of transport-layer security included with Oracle Java
ME Embedded 8.3.
import java.io.DataInputStream;
import java.io.IOException;
import java.io.InputStream;
import java.io.OutputStream;
import java.util.logging.Level;
import java.util.logging.Logger;
import javax.microedition.io.ConnectionOption;
import javax.microedition.io.Connector;
import javax.microedition.io.HttpConnection;
import javax.microedition.io.HttpsConnection;
import javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet;
import javax.microedition.rms.RecordStore;
/**
public class AuthenticateServer extends MIDlet {
 public static final int PASSED = 1;
 public static final int FAILED = -1;

 @Override
 public void startApp() {
 String serverAddr = "https://example.com:443";
 HttpsConnection hc;
 ConnectionOption<String> auth;
 ConnectionOption<String> protocol;
 int response = HttpConnection.HTTP_NOT_FOUND;
 try {
 auth = new ConnectionOption<>("AuthenticateServer", "TRUE");
 protocol = new ConnectionOption<>("Protocol", "TLSv1.1");
 hc = (HttpsConnection) Connector.open(serverAddr,
 Connector.READ_WRITE, auth, protocol);
 response = sendReqAndgetResp(hc); //request GET
 if (response == PASSED) {
 System.out.println("Pass");
 } else {
 System.out.println("Failed");
Authenticating an SSL Server
8-4 Developer’s Guide
 }
 } catch (IOException ex) {
 ex.printStackTrace();
 } catch (SecurityException ex) {
 ex.printStackTrace();
 } catch (RuntimeException ex) {
 ex.printStackTrace();
 }
 }
 @Override
 public void destroyApp(boolean unconditional) {
 }
 private int sendReqAndgetResp(HttpsConnection hc) {

 int resCode = -1;
 boolean pass = true;
 OutputStream os;
 try {
 ((HttpsConnection) hc).setRequestMethod(HttpConnection.GET);
 resCode = ((HttpsConnection) hc).getResponseCode();
 System.out.println("Response code is: " + resCode);

 if (resCode == HttpConnection.HTTP_OK) {
 return PASSED;
 } else {
 return FAILED;
 }

 } catch (IOException ex) {
 ex.printStackTrace();
 return FAILED;
 } finally {
 try {
 hc.close();
 } catch (IOException ex) {
 }
 }
 }
}
The following permissions must be added to the Application Descriptor of the IMlet.
Note that because we are using HTTPS, we require the HTTPS protocol permission,
even through the implementing protocol we requested for HTTPS (TLSv1.1) is the
same.
Table 8-3 Permissions for Example 4-2
Permission Device
javax.microedition.io.HTTPSProtocolPermission https://*:*
This example is similar to the previous example. Here, however, we create an HTTPS
connection with requests and responses (instead of a direct SSL connection). An
Authenticating an SSL Server
Working with Java ME Encryption 8-5
additional ConnectionOption object also instructs the Java ME example to
authenticate the server.
auth = new ConnectionOption<>("AuthenticateServer", "TRUE");
Enabling this option will verify that the server certificate is valid and has been signed
by a valid certificate authority, as well as performing a number of verification steps
against the data presented by the certificate. If the test is successful, you should see
output that identifies a connection to the HTTPS server at the address and port
specified.
Pass
Accessing the Keystore
Each Java ME Embedded implementation has one or more keystores, typically located
under the appdb/certs directory. There is one keystore for each application
privilege level (such as untrusted or operator). In order to programmatically
access the keystore, use the classes in the com.oracle.crypto.keystore package.
The following example shows source code used to create five certificates, store them in
the keystore, and then iterate over the contents of the keystore when completed.
import java.io.DataInputStream;
import com.oracle.crypto.cert.X509Certificate;
import com.oracle.crypto.cert.X509CertificateBuilder;
import com.oracle.crypto.keypair.KeyPair;
import com.oracle.crypto.keypair.KeyPairGenerator;
import com.oracle.crypto.keypair.PrivateKey;
import com.oracle.crypto.keypair.spec.RSAKeyGenParameterSpec;
import com.oracle.crypto.keystore.KeyStore;
import com.oracle.crypto.keystore.KeyStoreEntry;
import com.oracle.crypto.keystore.KeyStoreException;
import java.security.spec.AlgorithmParameterSpec;
import java.util.HashMap;
import java.util.Iterator;
import java.util.List;
import java.util.logging.Level;
import java.util.logging.Logger;
import javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet;
public class GenerateKeystore extends MIDlet {
 @Override
 public void startApp() {
 try {
 HashMap<String, KeyStoreEntry> shadow = new HashMap();
 KeyStore ks = KeyStore.getInstance(KeyStore.STORAGE.CLIENT);
 for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {

 KeyStoreEntry kse = generateRandomKeyStoreEntry();
 System.out.println("Add entry with certificate serial number: " +
 kse.getCertificate().getSerialNumber());
 ks.addEntry(kse);
 }
Accessing the Keystore
8-6 Developer’s Guide
 List<KeyStoreEntry> list = ks.getEntries();
 Iterator<KeyStoreEntry> iter = list.iterator();
 while (iter.hasNext()) {
 KeyStoreEntry kse = iter.next();
 String subject = kse.getCertificate().getSubject();
 System.out.println("Certificate Subject: " + subject);
 PrivateKey entryKey = kse.getPrivateKey();
 byte[] entryEncoded = entryKey.getEncoded();
 System.out.println("Private Key: " + entryEncoded.toString());
 }
 } catch (SecurityException ex) {
 // Handle exception
 } catch (KeyStoreException ex) {
 // Handle exception
 }
 }
 @Override
 public void destroyApp(boolean unconditional) {
 }
 private KeyStoreEntry generateRandomKeyStoreEntry() {
 KeyStoreEntry entry = null;
 try {
 AlgorithmParameterSpec param;
 param = new RSAKeyGenParameterSpec(512, 3);
 KeyPairGenerator kpg = KeyPairGenerator.getInstance("RSA");
 kpg.initialize(param);
 KeyPair kp = kpg.generateKeyPair();
 int serialNumber = (int)(Math.random() * 1000000);
 System.out.println("Create X509 Certificate serial: " + serialNumber);
 X509CertificateBuilder builder = new X509CertificateBuilder(kp);
 builder.setSerialNumber("" + serialNumber);
 builder.setSubject("C=JP;ST=NE;L=Menlo;O=Oracle;OU=Java;CN=Test." +
 serialNumber);
 builder.setValidityInDays(365);
 X509Certificate cert = builder.create();
 entry = new KeyStoreEntry(cert, kp.getPrivate(), "test");
 } catch (Throwable ex) {
 ex.printStackTrace();
 }
 return entry;
 }
}
Accessing the Keystore
Working with Java ME Encryption 8-7
The following permissions must be added to the Application Descriptor of the IMlet to
access the keystore on the Java ME Embedded device.
Table 8-4 Permissions for Example 4-3
Permission Device
com.oracle.crypto.keystore.KeyStorePermission client_only
This example will access the local keystore on the embedded board (client) with the
following call:
KeyStore ks = KeyStore.getInstance(KeyStore.STORAGE.CLIENT);
Note that the keystore that is accessed will depend on the trust level of the application.
If the Java ME embedded application is not signed, it will fall into the untrusted
security domain by default.
We can access the keystore similar to accessing it with the Java SE environment. First,
we create a KeyStoreEntry object and populate it with a certificate. This is, in turn,
added to the embedded keystore via a simple loop and iterated over later in the
program. Here is the output after running the program:
Creating X509 Certificate with serial number: 798364Add keystore entry with
certificate serial number: 4F:53:40Creating X509 Certificate with serial number:
67079Add keystore entry with certificate serial number: 43:07:09Creating X509
Certificate with serial number: 723418Add keystore entry with certificate serial
number: 48:22:12Creating X509 Certificate with serial number: 792956Add keystore
entry with certificate serial number: 4F:1D:38Creating X509 Certificate with serial
number: 661145Add keystore entry with certificate serial number: 42:0B:2D
Certificate Subject: C=JP,ST=NE,L=Menlo,O=Oracle,OU=Java,CN=Test.798364Private Key:
[B@fcd4cfc2Certificate Subject: C=JP,ST=NE,L=Menlo,O=Oracle,OU=Java,CN=Test.
67079Private Key: [B@1c1cc1a5Certificate Subject:
C=JP,ST=NE,L=Menlo,O=Oracle,OU=Java,CN=Test.723418Private Key:
[B@e854b14cCertificate Subject: C=JP,ST=NE,L=Menlo,O=Oracle,OU=Java,CN=Test.
792956Private Key: [B@1d69c567Certificate Subject:
C=JP,ST=NE,L=Menlo,O=Oracle,OU=Java,CN=Test.661145Private Key: [B@1a5796e6
Configuring the Board as a Secure Server
The Java ME Embedded binary contains functionality that enables an embedded board
to function as a server using secure protocols. The functionality is identical to the
configuration of a Java SE server.
The secure server connection requires a server certificate on the device. This certificate
should be imported into the device with a private key.
mekeytool.exe -import -Xdevice:EmbeddedExternalDevice1 -keystore myServertCert.jks -
storepass <store password> -keypass <private key password>
The following example shows source code used to setup the embedded board as a
server.
import java.io.IOException;
import java.util.logging.Level;
import java.util.logging.Logger;
import javax.microedition.io.ConnectionOption;
import javax.microedition.io.Connector;
Configuring the Board as a Secure Server
8-8 Developer’s Guide
import javax.microedition.io.SecureConnection;
import javax.microedition.io.SecureServerConnection;
import javax.microedition.midlet.MIDlet;
public class EmbeddedServer extends MIDlet {
 @Override
 public void startApp() {
 String PORT = "10005";
 SecureServerConnection ssc = null;
 ConnectionOption<String> protocol = null;
 try {
 protocol = new ConnectionOption<>("Protocol", "TLSv1.1");
 ConnectionOption serverCert = new ConnectionOption("Certificate",
<Certificate Subject DN>);
 ssc = (SecureServerConnection) Connector.open("ssl://:"+PORT,
 protocol, serverCert);
 System.out.println("Connection listening on:");
 System.out.println("Address: " + ssc.getLocalAddress());
 System.out.println("Port: " + ssc.getLocalPort());
 ssc.acceptAndOpen();
 System.out.println("Connection made!");
 } catch (SecurityException ex) {
 ex.printStackTrace();
 } catch (RuntimeException ex) {
 ex.printStackTrace();
 } catch (IOException ex) {
 ex.printStackTrace();
 }
 }
 @Override
 public void destroyApp(boolean unconditional) {
 }
}
Note: In this code example the <Certificate Subject DN> parameter
should be replaced with the Subject DN of the used certificate.
The following permissions must be added to the Application Descriptor of the IMlet to
access the keystore on the Java ME Embedded device.
Table 8-5 Permissions for Example 4-3
Permission Device
javax.microedition.io.SSLProtocolPermission ssl://*:*
javax.microedition.io.SSLProtocolPermission ssl://:*
Configuring the Board as a Secure Server
Working with Java ME Encryption 8-9
This example uses a SecureServerConnection object, which creates a socket at
port 10005 using the SSL protocol. It is essential to include the following line as well:
ssc.acceptAndOpen();
Without this line, the secure socket will never accept an incoming connection, and any
attempt to make a connection will result in a runtime exception. Note that a call to this
method will block until a successful connection is made.
As with the previous examples, the Java ME Embedded keystore must have a valid
server certificate for the trust-level that the application is running under, which will be
validated upon any secure connection. If the certificate is absent, or is not valid, an
exception will be thrown on the server.
The client-side code to make the connection is nearly identical to the client-side
example earlier in this chapter, with a slight change to the port and the protocol. A
successful connection should output the following:
Address: 192.168.1.80
Port: 10005
Connection made!
Configuring the Board as a Secure Server
8-10 Developer’s Guide
A
Java ME Optimization Techniques
This appendix covers common optimization techniques when working with Java ME
Embedded devices. Many of these techniques are common to the CLDC VM in both
Java Embedded and traditional Java ME.
Design
Embedded systems are typically designed to perform a specific task, unlike a generalpurpose computer that strives to handle multiple tasks with equal efficiency. Some
embedded systems also have real-time performance constraints for safety and
usability; others may have little or no performance requirements, allowing the system
hardware to be simplified to reduce costs. As such, developers should use the simplest
application design possible to avoid overtaxing the embedded system.
Memory
Resources are frequently limited in embedded devices. Often memory is the most
valuable resource. Many embedded devices have memory that is measured in
megabytes (MB), and some of it is used by the Runtime Operating System (RTOS),
leaving the remainder for use by the Java VM and its applications.
Be aware of how much memory is typically used by your application, the RTOS, and
the Java VM. This will vary from one embedded board to another. By the time a Java
ME embedded application exhausts all memory and is subject to an
OutOfMemoryError, there are few options left: the application must either force the
VM to free any unnecessary memory using a System.gc() call, or if that doesn't
work, crash.
Threads
Java threads are often an expensive resource with embedded Java VMs. Java
embedded applications work best when using minimal application threads. If you
must create multi-threaded code, be sure to minimize the use of synchronized code,
which can be expensive on embedded devices. As a general rule, avoid using the
Timer class, as an extra thread is created for each timer.
A common technique for creating Java ME embedded applications is to create a
background thread in the startApp() method of the MIDlet class and reuse it
throughout the IMlet lifecycle.
System Callbacks
System callback functions should never block and should return as soon as possible to
avoid slowing down the CLDC VM. Pay special attention to the following MIDlet
methods:
• startApp()
Java ME Optimization Techniques A-1
• pauseApp()
• MIDlet constructor
Input/Output
The Record Management System (RMS) is an I/O resource that should be used
carefully. With any application that uses RecordStore objects, opening and closing
operations should be minimized. In addition, strive to group reads and writes in one
section of code as much as possible. Spreading RecordStore read and writes across
the application can slow down the application.
Another common strategy when working with RecordStore objects is to use buffers,
which reside in memory and are often faster. This is a common technique:
• For reading record stores, read the entire record into a buffer, then parse the buffer.
• For writing record stores, write to a single buffer, then write the buffer to a record.
General Tips
Here are some other general hints for optimizing your code that are pervasive
throughout the industry for Java ME code:
• Object creation is very costly with respect to memory and performance overhead.
Create objects only when needed, and reuse any object instances that are created in
a cache.
• Use lazy instantiation if appropriate. However, many Java ME developers will
create all objects outside the main loop of the program and reuse them as the
application runs. With reusable objects, be sure to include a method that returns
them to the original state, independent of the object constructor.
• Avoid auto-boxing when possible.
• Do not perform assertions in tight loops.
• Avoid using variable-length arguments (varargs).
• Use local variables instead of global variables when you can. Local variables are
faster and generate less bytecode.
• Only include system classes that you need. Avoid using wild character imports like
import java.util.* Instead, import classes directly, such as import
java.util.Date.
• Don't perform string concatenations using the "+" operator. Use the
StringBuffer class instead. For example, don't do the following:
String str = new String ("Hello ");str += "World";
Instead, do this:
StringBuffer str = new StringBuffer ("Hello ");str.append("World");
Remember that in Java, String objects are immutable, so performing
concatenation with the "+" operator will in fact create a StringBuffer, copy the
contents of the String over, append the other String, then copy the result back
into a different immutable String object.
Input/Output
A-2 Developer’s Guide
• Divide your multi-dimensional arrays into single-dimensional arrays.
Multidimensional arrays take more time to calculate the proper index in memory.
• Avoid any unnecessary creation and disposal of objects and variables inside loops.
For example, avoid a construct like this:
for (int i = 0; i < length; i++) { MyConstantClass c = new MyConstantClass();
results[i] = c.doSomething();}
• Use a switch-case construct instead of if blocks, as they are compiled into more
optimized bytecode. Remember that starting with Java 8, the switch keyword can
handle strings, which is more efficient that creating a large number of if blocks
that test using the equals() method.
• Use public variables directly instead of using get/set accessors.
• Set variables to null when you don't need them anymore to assist with garbage
collection.
Application Size
Aside from minimizing the number of classes in your application, developers can also
make use of obfuscator tools, which are present in NetBeans and other IDEss. The
original purpose of an obfuscator is to make reverse engineering bytecode more
difficult. However, it can also create smaller and often faster class files. In fact,
obfuscators typically reduce Java ME embedded class file size by 25% to 35%.
The NetBeans IDE contains an option to install the ProGuard obfuscator library. You
can choose this option by right-clicking on your project and bringing up the Project
Properties. Next, expand the Build leaf and select Obfuscating. If ProGaurd is not
already installed, press the button to download and install the NetBeans module, as
shown in Figure A-1.
Application Size
Java ME Optimization Techniques A-3
Figure A-1 Installing the ProGuard Obfuscator Library
Once the obfuscator is installed, choose an obfuscation level by moving the slider
anywhere from Level 1 and Level 9. As shown in Figure A-2, each level presents a
detailed description in the window below that shows what operations the obfuscator
is performing.
Figure A-2 Choosing an Obfuscation Level
Application Size
A-4 Developer’s Guide
B
Java ME Embedded Properties
This appendix documents the configurable options that are found in many ports of the
Oracle Java ME Embedded product. System properties in the Oracle Java ME
Embedded distribution can be configured in one of two ways: by modifying the
jwc_properties.ini file (if available), or by using the VM proxy command-line
interface (CLI).
Modifying the Properties File
Most platforms have a jwc_properties.ini file that can be modified with a text
editor. The jwc_properties.ini file has two distinct sections:
• [application]
Properties that are used by Java applications that are running on the board.
• [internal]
Properties used for internal system configuration.
In addition, each jwc_properties.ini file contains comments that help describe
the purpose of each entry.
It is highly recommend that you read through the original jwc_properties.ini file
for your target embedded board, as it contains essential information about each
property. Note that the Oracle Java ME Embedded runtime may alter the values inside
of the jwc_properties.ini file at any time (especially if the set-property and
save-properties commands are issued in the CLI), and typically without
comments, so it helps to study the original version that comes with each distribution
bundle.
Using the Command-Line Interface
In addition to specifying properties in the jwc_properties.ini file, system
properties can also be modified on the fly using the CLI set-property command.
The set-property command uses the following syntax:
set-property <key> <value>
If you wish to examine the current value of any property, use the get-property
command.
get-property <key>
Note that after any property change, the VM state is unpredictable, and it is necessary
to issue the save-properties command and 'shutdown -r' (or, depending on the
embedded board, cycle the power) to activate the changes. See Chapter 2 for more
information on using the VM proxy CLI.
Java ME Embedded Properties B-1
The list of configurable system properties differs extensively on each platform and
with each release, and may be retrieved by issuing the following command via the CLI
proxy:
> properties-list
For example, the properties list that is generated for the Raspberry Pi would look
similar to the following:
read only STRING xml.rpc.subset.version = 1.0
read/write STRING xml.jaxp.subset.version = 1.0
read/write BOOL vmconfig.system_reboot = false
read only STRING system.storage_root = ../appdb
read/write BOOL system.network.reconnect = false
read/write INT system.jam_space = 4096000
read only STRING system.default_storage = ../appdb
read only STRING socket = com.sun.midp.io.j2me.socket.ProtocolPushImpl
read/write STRING security.providers.jar = null
...
(several lines omitted)
...
read/write INT AMS_MEMORY_LIMIT_MVM = -1
Using the Command-Line Interface
B-2 Developer’s Guide
C
Signing an IMlet Suite's JAR File
Establishing trust is important for IMlet suites that use security-sensitive APIs. Signing
an IMlet suite's JAR file allows the suite to be trusted. A JAR file is signed with the
jadtool utility. A copy of the jadtool utility is provided with the Oracle Java ME
Embedded software bundle.
The jadtool utility signs a JAR file by adding a certificate and the JAR file's digital
signature to a Java Application Descriptor (JAD) file. Adding a certificate and a JAR
file's digital signature to a JAD file are separate steps. You must complete both steps to
sign a JAR file. The steps are in “Instructions for Using JadTool”.
You can also use the jadtool utility to obtain information about a certificate in a JAD
file. The information can include the name of the entity that issued the certificate, the
certificate's serial number, the dates between which it is valid, and its Message Digest
Algorithm 5 (MD5) and Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) fingerprints.
Instructions for Using JadTool
This section explains how to use the JadTool utility through an example that signs a
hypothetical IMlet suite named ImaginaryIMlet.
Note:
ImaginaryIMlet is not an actual IMlet suite. No ImaginaryIMlet files are
included with this release.
The example uses the key pair provided with the software. The key pair is in the
j2se_test_keystore.bin file, which is a keystore managed with the Java SE
platform's keytool utility. For information on the keytool utility, see http://
download.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/tools/windows/
keytool.html.
After you build an implementation of the software, j2se_test_keystore.bin is
located in this directory:
{OUTPUT-Dir}/meep/bin/i386
Where {OUTPUT-Dir} is the directory that contains the output of your builds of the
Oracle Java ME Embedded software.
The password for the file is keystorepwd. The alias of the key pair is dummyca. The
private key password is keypwd. The file is provided for testing purposes.
For IMlet suites on end-user devices, use an RSA key pair backed by a certificate or
certificate chain from a certificate authority. You must import the certificate or
certificate chain into a Java SE platform's keystore with the Java SE platform's
keytool utility.
Signing an IMlet Suite's JAR File C-1
The JadTool utility is packaged in a JAR file named JadTool.jar in this directory
where {OJMEE-Dir} is the base directory of the Oracle Java ME Embedded installation:
{OJMEE-Dir}\toolkit-lib\process\jadtool\code
Using the JadTool Utility
1. Open a Windows command prompt.
2. Change your current directory to the directory that holds your IMlet's JAR and
JAD files.
3. Add the certificate for your key pair to the JAD file using the JadTool utility.
The JadTool utility adds the certificate as the value of an attribute named
MIDlet-Certificate-m-n, where m is the number of the certificate chain (it
defaults to one but you can provide a different number with the -chainnum
switch), and n is an integer that, for new certificates, begins at one and increments
by one each time you add a new certificate to the JAD file.
For example, if {OUTPUT-Dir}/binaries is C:\jme\src\output\binaries,
the following command adds the certificate as the value of the attribute MIDletCertificate-1-1 to the example JAD file:
C:\myIMlets>java -jar %OJMEE_HOME%\toolkit-lib\process
\jadtool\code\JadTool.jar -addcert -alias dummyca -storepass
keystorepwd -keystore C:\jme\src\output\midp\bin
\i386\j2se_test_keystore.bin -inputjad ImaginaryIMlet.jad -
outputjad ImaginaryIMlet.jad
4. (Optional) Verify that the certificate is added to the JAD file by using the JadTool
utility to list the certificate in the JAD file.
C:\myIMlets>java -jar %OJMEE_HOME%\toolkit-lib\process
\jadtool\code\JadTool.jar -showcert -certnum 1 -inputjad
ImaginaryIMlet.jad
Subject: C=US, ST=CA, L=Santa Clara, O=dummy CA, OU=JCT, CN=thehost
Issuer : C=US, ST=CA, L=Santa Clara, O=dummy CA, OU=JCT, CN=thehost
Serial number: 3d3ece8a
Valid from Wed Jul 24 08:58:02 PDT 2002 to Sat Jul 21 08:58:02 PDT 2012
Certificate fingerprints:
 MD5: 87:7f:5e:64:c8:dd:b4:bf:35:39:76:87:99:9b:68:82
 SHA: 9d:c0:88:ce:08:83:cd:e6:fe:13:8b:26:f6:b4:df:e2:da:3c:25:98
5. If you have a key pair backed by a certificate chain, import the intermediate
certificates.
Import the intermediate certificates using the JadTool utility with the -addcert
switch shown in Step 3, taking care to use the correct chain order.
For example:
The XXXX company provides a certificate that vouches for your key pair, the
WidgetCertificates company vouches for the XXXX certificate, and VeriSign
vouches for the WidgetCertificates certificate.
Import the XXXX certificate followed by the WidgetCertificate. The XXXX
certificate is MIDlet-Certificate-1-2 and the WidgetCertificate certificate is
MIDlet-Certificate-1-3.
Using the JadTool Utility
C-2 Developer’s Guide
Note:
You do not import the certificate of the root CA. In this example, the certificate
is from VeriSign. The root certificate is on the device.
6. Sign the JAR file using the JadTool utility.
The JadTool utility signs the JAR file, base64 encodes the signature, and stores it
as the value of the MIDlet-Jar-RSA-SHA1 attribute of the output JAD file.
Note:
The key used to sign the JAR file must be from the same Java SE keystore
entry as key pair specified in Step 3. The JadTool utility does not check that
the JAR file is signed with a keystore entry that has a certificate in the JAD file.
For example:
C:\myIMlets>java -jar %OJMEE_HOME%\toolkit-lib\process
\jadtool\code\JadTool.jar -addjarsig -keystore C:\jme\src
\output\midp\bin\i386\j2se_test_keystore.bin -alias dummyca -
storepass keystorepwd -keypass keypwd -jarfile
ImaginaryIMlet.jar -chainnum 2 -inputjad ImaginaryIMlet.jad -
outputjad ImaginaryIMlet.jad
Optionally, you can sign a JAR file with a stronger signature (JAD attribute
MIDlet-Jar-RSA-SHA256) using the -useSha256 command line switch.
For example, java -jar jadtool.jar -addjarsig -useSha256 -keystore
j2se_test_keystore.bin -alias dummyca -storepass keystorepwd -
keypass keypwd -jarfile ImaginaryIMlet.jar -inputjad
ImaginaryIMlet.jad -outputjad ImaginarySignedSha256IMlet.jad
Handling Expired Certificates
A JAD file can have multiple certificate, but it can hold the signature for only one JAR
file. When a certificate in the JAD file expires, you must add a new certificate and resign the JAR file. When re-signing the JAR file, the JadTool utility overwrites the
current digital signature with the new one.
Options Summary
The jadtool utility supports the following options:
• none
Running the tool without options returns the same information as the -help
option.
• -addcert -alias keyAlias [ -keystore keystore ] [ -storepass password ]
[ -chainnum chainNumber ] [ -certnum certNumber ] [ -encoding
encoding ] -inputjad inputJadFile -outputjad outputJadFile
Adds a certificate to a JAD file. To add a certificate, this utility first creates the
certificate from the entry identified by keyAlias in keystore. The keystore, if provided,
must be a Java Cryptography Architecture keystore (a file containing data such as key
Handling Expired Certificates
Signing an IMlet Suite's JAR File C-3
entries in a format that the Java SE platform can use). If keystore is not provided, its
default, {User_Home_Dir}/.keystore, is used. If keystore requires a password to
access its contents, password must be provided.
After creating the certificate and attribute name, this utility concatenates the contents
of inputJadFile with the new certificate and writes it as outputJadFile.
You can use the same file for the inputJadFile and outputJadFile.
The certificate is in the JAD file as the value of an attribute named MIDletCertificate-m-n, where:
• m is chainNumber, or 1 if it is not provided. A JAD file can contain multiple
certificate chain.
• n is certNumber. The value certNumber depends on whether the new certificate
replaces an existing certificate. If the certificate is a replacement, then certNumber
must be the number of the certificate to replace. For example, if the new certificate
would replace the one stored as the value of attribute MIDletCertificate-1-3, then certNumber must be 3. If the certificate is new,
certNumber is ignored.
If inputJadFile uses an encoding other than UTF-8 (ASCII with unicode escapes),
encoding must be specified. This utility uses the same encoding for reading
inputJadFile and writing outputJadFile.
• -addjarsig [-useSha256][ -jarfile jarFile ] -alias keyAlias [ -
keystore keystore ] -storepass storePassword -keypass keyPassword [ -
encoding encoding ] [-chainnum chainNumber ] -inputjad inputJadFile -
outputjad outputJadFile
Creates a digital signature for jarFile. If jarFile is not specified, the value of the
MIDlet-Jar-URL attribute from inputJadFile is used. The attribute's value must be
a valid HTTP URL.
This utility creates a digital signature for the JAR file using the private key
identified by keyAlias in keystore. If keystore is not provided, its default is
{User_Home_Dir}/.keystore. This utility gets the key from keystore using
storePassword and keyPassword, and creates the signature with it using the EMSAPKCS1-v1_5 encoding method of PKCS #1, version 2.2. See RFC 2437 at http://
www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2437.txt.
After creating the signature, this utility concatenates the contents of inputJadFile
with the signature, and writes it as outputJadFile. The signature is base64 encoded,
and is in the output JAD file as the value of the MIDlet-Jar-RSA-SHA1-m
attribute where m is chainNumber, or 1 if it is not provided. This number
corresponds to the value for m in the MIDlet-Certificate-m-n attribute.
If inputJadFile uses an encoding other than UTF-8 (ASCII with unicode escapes),
encoding must be specified. This utility uses the same encoding for reading
inputJadFile and writing outputJadFile.
• -help
Prints a usage summary.
• -showcert [ ( [ -certnum certNumber ] [ -chainnum chainNumber ] ) | -
all ] [ -encoding encoding ] -inputjad inputJadFile
Options Summary
C-4 Developer’s Guide
Prints information about either all certificates, or the certificate that corresponds to
the given certNumber and chainNumber in the inputJadFile. The option -all cannot
be combined with the -certnum and -chainnum options.
The chainNumber of a certificate is the m in the JAD file's MIDlet-Certificatem-n attribute, while the certNumber is the n. For example, to show the certificate
that is the value of attribute MIDlet-Certificate-2-3, the chainNumber must
be 2 and certNumber must be 3. If certNumber or chainNumber are not provided (and
the -all option is not used), the utility uses a 1.
The information printed includes the certificate's subject, issuer, serial number,
dates between which it is valid, and fingerprints (md5 and SHA). The attributes in
the subject and issuer names are shown in reverse order from what is in the
certificate (a side effect of using the Java SE platform certificate API). As a result,
the names might not match what is returned from other tools that display a
certificate's subject and issuer names.
If inputJadFile uses an encoding other than UTF-8 (ASCII with unicode escapes),
encoding must be specified. The tool uses the same encoding for reading inputJadFile
and writing outputJadFile.
Options Summary
Signing an IMlet Suite's JAR File C-5
Options Summary
C-6 Developer’s Guide
D
Managing Keys and Certificates
The Oracle Java ME Embedded platform uses public keys from a Certificate Authority
(CA) to validate Web sites and signed IMlet suites. The Oracle Java ME Embedded
implementation also uses private keys from certificates to establish secure connections
with client authentication. When the platform uses a secure protocol to access a Web
site, the site provides a certificate which is typically signed by a CA. In the same
manner, signed IMlet suites also contain a certificate that is signed by a CA. The
Oracle Java ME Embedded platform checks the validity of a certificate by using the
CA's public key. By signing a certificate, a CA certifies the identify of the owner of the
Web site or IMlet suite.
You can manage the CA certificates, public keys, and private keys on the embedded
board by using the MEKeyTool utility. The MEKeyTool utility is provided with the
Java ME SDK distribution, and is similar to the keytool utility provided with the
Java SE platform, except that MEKeyTool will also operate across a network on the
keystores of an embedded device that is currently recognized by the Oracle Java ME
Embedded Device Manager.
This chapter describes how to use MEKeyTool to manage keystores that are used by
the Oracle Java ME Embedded Emulator or recognized by the Oracle Java ME SDK
Device Manager.
Running MEKeyTool
MEKeyTool is an executable that can be found in the following location:
{ME-SDK_Home-Dir}\bin\MEKeyTool.exe
Where ME-SDK-Home-Dir is the base directory of the Oracle Java ME Embedded
installation.
To connect to a keystore on an embedded board instead of the emulator, add the -
Xdevice option to reference a device currently recognized by the Oracle Java ME
Embedded Device Manager:
MEKeyTool.exe -Xdevice:EmbeddedExternalDevice1
Warning:
Each embedded board may only accept a limited subset of commands,
depending on the functionality offered. To list the functionality supported by
the device EmbeddedExternalDevice1, for example, you can use the
emulator's Xquery option:
emulator.exe -Xquery -Xdevice:EmbeddedExternalDevice1
Managing Keys and Certificates D-1
Using the MEKeyTool Utility
1. Open a command prompt or terminal window.
2. Change your current directory to the location of the EXE file shown above, or add
the directory to your current %PATH%.
3. Run MEKeyTool with the options needed.
For example, use the following command to display help:
MEKeyTool.exe -help
ME Keystores
The MEKeyTool utility keeps the CA certificates, public keys, and private keys in an
ME keystore. Depending on the device, the keystore is at the following locations, where
base-dir is the base directory of the Oracle Java ME Embedded or Oracle Java ME SDK
installation.
Table D-1 Location of Keystores
Device Location
Emulator {base_dir}/runtimes/meep/appdb/certs
Embedded Boards [base_dir}/appdb/certs (if file system is accessible)
This keystore directory contains an index file named _main.ks and a set of certificate
files. The platform includes the key of one CA.
Warning:
Oracle does not recommend modifying the default keystore, but instead
modifying a copy, either one that is user-generated or in the working directory
for the appropriate device.
Working Directory for the Emulator
When the Oracle Java ME Embedded emulator is first started, it creates a working
directory in {User_Home_Dir}/javame_sdk/{Version}/work/{device}/appdb/certs.
(Note that this is only the case for emulated devices, such as EmbeddedDevice1, not
devices that map to actual embedded boards such as EmbeddedExternalDevice1.)
Next, it copies all certificates and several other important files there. Be aware that
deleting the working directory removes all device settings and, of course, any
additions to the local keystore.
Note:
The MEKeytool utility enables you to import keys from Java SE keystores.
However, you cannot use the MEKeytool utility directly on a Java SE
keystore. For example, if you try to use the MEKeytool utility to view public
keys in a Java SE keystore, the utility displays an error message that the
keystore is corrupted. An ME keystore has a different format Java SE platform
Using the MEKeyTool Utility
D-2 Developer’s Guide
keystores, which have a format in accordance with the Java Cryptography
Architecture specification.
Creating and Managing Multiple ME Keystores
In addition to managing the public keys in the ME keystore, you can use the
MEKeytool utility to manage additional ME keystores, both with the emulator and
some embedded boards that contain an accessible filesystem. For example, during
testing you might want to have multiple keystores to run against. One keystore could
contain all the necessary testing keys, a second keystore could contain a subset of the
testing keys, and a third keystore could contain an expired key.
Creating Alternate ME Keystores
The MEKeytool utility does not create a new ME keystore directory. The developer
must create an empty keystore first, consisting of a directory and an empty _main.ks
file, which can be copied from the keystore provided with the distribution bundle. See
Importing a Key for instructions on how to import a key.
Managing Alternate ME Keystores
To manage a keystore other than the default, use the -import -MEkeystore option:
MEKeyTool.exe -import -MEkeystore keystoreName ...
For example, if you created an ME keystore, {User_Home_Dir}\myKeys
\set2_test_keys.ks, that contains the keys that are needed to run a particular set
of tests, use the MEKeyTool command to manage that keystore:
MEKeyTool.exe -import -MEkeystore {User_Home_Dir}/myKeys/
set2_test_keys.ks ...
For all MEKeyTool commands, you receive an error message if the file that you
provide as an argument to -MEkeystore does not exist.
Importing a Key
You can add a key to an ME keystore by importing it from the Java Cryptography
Architecture keystore that comes with the Java SE platform or from a keystore that
you create. For more information on the keystore that comes with the Java SE
platform, see http://download.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/
tools/windows/keytool.html.
The file name for the Java SE keystore is .keystore and the default location is in
your home directory. This file is created if you use the Java SE platform's keytool
utility to create keys and you do not specify a different location. The MEKeyTool
utility references this keystore unless you use the -keystore argument to specify a
different keystore.
Note:
If you use a Java SE keystore other than the default, the new keystore might
require a password.
The -import option imports a key. For example, to add a key with an alias dummyca
from the Java SE keystore j2se_test_keystore.bin that has a password,
Importing a Key
Managing Keys and Certificates D-3
keystorepwd, to the ME keystore at {User_Home_Dir}/myKeys/
set2_test_keys.ks:
C:\>MEKeyTool.exe -import -alias dummyca -keystore j2se_test_keystore.bin -
storepass keystorepwd -MEkeystore myKeys/set2_test_keys.ks
If it is necessary to import a certificate with a private key from a file in PKCS12 format
(for example, cert_with_key.p12) with the keystore password storepwd and the
key password keypwd, use the command:
C:\>MEKeyTool.exe -import -keystore cert_with_key.p12 -storepass storepwd -
keypass keypwd -MEkeystore myKeys\set2_test_keys.ks
Listing Available Keys
An ME keystore organizes the keys that it contains by giving each one a number. For
each key, the keystore also holds the name of the entity to whom the public key
belongs, the time over which the key is valid, and the domain associated with the key.
The MEKeyTool -list command displays information for each key in a particular
keystore.
The following example lists the contents of the ME keystore {User_Home_Dir}/
myKeys/set1_test_keys.ks:
C:\>MEKeyTool.exe -list -MEkeystore myKeys/set1_test_keys.ks
Key 1
 Owner: C=US;O=VeriSign, Inc.;OU=Class 3 Public Primary Certification Authority
 Valid from Mon Jan 29 03:00:00 MSK 1996 to Wed Aug 02 03:59:59 MSD 2028
 Security Domain: identified_third_party
 Enabled: true
Key 2
 Owner: O=Oracle;C=myserver
 Valid from Sat Aug 03 00:43:51 PDT 2002 to Tue Jul 31 00:43:51 PDT 2012
 Security Domain: operator
 Enabled: true
The following example lists of the contents of the ME keystore on a Raspberry Pi
device currently listed as EmbeddedExternalDevice1. Again, note that the device
must already be registered with the device manager.
C:>MEKeyTool.exe -list -Xdevice:EmbeddedExternalDevice1
[1]
Owner CN=AddTrust External CA Root,OU=AddTrust External TTP Network,O=AddTrust
AB,C=SE valid from Tue May 30 03:48:38 PDT 2000 till Sat May 30 03:48:38 PDT 2020
[2]
Owner CN=GlobalSign Root CA,OU=Root CA,O=GlobalSign nv-sa,C=BE valid from Tue Sep
01 05:00:00 PDT 1998 till Fri Jan 28 04:00:00 PST 2028
[3]
Owner CN=GTE CyberTrust Global Root,OU=GTE CyberTrust Solutions\, Inc.,O=GTE
Corporation,C=US valid from Wed Aug 12 17:29:00 PDT 1998 till Mon Aug 13 16:59:00
PDT 2018
[4]
Owner CN=Entrust.net Secure Server Certification Authority,OU=(c) 1999 Entrust.net
Limited,OU=www.entrust.net/CPS incorp. by ref. (limits liab.),O=Entrust.net,C=US
valid from Tue May 25 09:09:40 PDT 1999 till Sat May 25 09:39:40 PDT 2019
[5]
Listing Available Keys
D-4 Developer’s Guide
Owner OU=Class 3 Public Primary Certification Authority,O=VeriSign\, Inc.,C=US
valid from Sun Jan 28 16:00:00 PST 1996 till Tue Aug 01 16:59:59 PDT 2028
[6]
Owner OU=VeriSign Trust Network,OU=(c) 1998 VeriSign\, Inc. - For authorized use
only,OU=Class 3 Public Primary Certification Authority - G2,O=VeriSign\, Inc.,C=US
valid from Sun May 17 17:00:00 PDT 1998 till Tue Aug 01 16:59:59 PDT 2028
[7]
Owner CN=thehost,OU=Unknown,O=TEST,L=Unknown,ST=Unknown,C=US valid from Wed Nov 16
11:40:27 PST 2005 till Sat Nov 14 11:40:27 PST 2015
[8]
Owner CN=GeoTrust CA for UTI,O=Unified Testing Initiative (UTI),C=US valid from
Thu Jan 22 21:00:00 PST 2004 till Tue Jan 23 20:55:00 PST 2024
[9]
Owner
1.2.840.113549.1.9.1=#16197072656d69756d2d736572766572407468617774652e636f6d,
CN=Thawte Premium Server CA,OU=Certification Services Division,O=Thawte Consulting
cc,L=Cape Town,ST=Western Cape,C=ZA valid from Wed Jul 31 17:00:00 PDT 1996 till
Thu Dec 31 15:59:59 PST 2020
[10]
Owner OU=Equifax Secure Certificate Authority,O=Equifax,C=US valid from Sat Aug 22
09:41:51 PDT 1998 till Wed Aug 22 09:41:51 PDT 2018
Deleting a Key
When keys expire, you must delete them from the keystore and add their
replacements. You can also delete unused keys. For example, if you added the public
key of a test site with a self-signed certificate during testing, you can delete that key
when testing is completed.
The -delete command to the MEKeyTool utility removes a key from an ME
keystore. The -delete command requires one of the following options:
• -owner ownerName
Sets the string that describes the owner of the public key in a given keystore. Use
the -list command to print information about each key in the keystore. The
string in the command must match the one printed when you use the -list
command to the MEKeyTool utility. See Listing Available Keys for more
information.
• -number keyNumber
Sets the number that a given keystore has assigned to each of its keys. The number
is greater than or equal to one. Use the -list command to print the number that
the keystore has assigned to each of its keys. See Listing Available Keys for more
information.
The following examples show two ways to delete a key from the ME keystore
{User_Home_Dir}/myKeys/set1_test_keys.ks (the keystore used in Listing
Available Keys):
• Deleting a key by using its key numberC:\>MEKeyTool.exe -delete -number 1 -MEkeystore myKeys
\set1_test_keys.ks
Deleting a Key
Managing Keys and Certificates D-5
• Deleting a key by using its owner nameC:\>MEKeyTool.exe -delete -owner "C=US;O=VeriSign,\
Inc.;OU=Class 3 Public Primary Certification Authority" -
\MEkeystore myKeys\set1_test_keys.ks
Replacing a Key
Some situations require that you replace a key (such as when a key expires). To
replace a key, first delete the old key, then import the new key.
Note:
If you import the new key before deleting the old one, the MEKeyTool utility
displays an error message that the owner of the key has a key in the ME
keystore.
MEKeyTool Summary
The MEKeyTool utility supports the following options:
• no option
Runs the tool without options and returns the same information as the -help
option.
• -help
Prints a usage summary.
• -import [-alias keyAlias] [ -keystore JavaSEKeystore ] [ -keypass
keyPassword ] [ -storepass storePassword ] [ -client clientName ]
Imports a key identified by security client clientName or keyAlias from
JavaSEKeystore into the device keystore. If JavaSEKeystore is not provided, its
default, {User_Home_Dir}/.keystore, is used (where {User_Home_Dir} is the
user's home directory).
If JavaSEKeystore requires a password, you must provide storePassword. If the -
keypass argument is provided, the private key will be imported to the ME
keystore together with public certificate.
• -list [ -client clientName ]
Lists the number, owner, and validity period, and domain of the key identified by
security client clientName, or all keys if the option is omitted, in the device keystore.
• -delete [ -client clientName ] ( -owner ownerName | -number keyNumber )
Deletes the key identified by security client clientName, ownerName or keyNumber
from the device keystore.
You can provide either ownerName or keyNumber, but not both. You can find the
valid values for them by running the MEKeyTool utility with the -list command.
• -export [ -client clientName ] ( -number keyNumber ) ( -out outputFile )
Exports a certificate, specified by security client clientName or keyNumber, from the
device keystore to the output file outputFile. The format of the outputFile is:
Replacing a Key
D-6 Developer’s Guide
– PEM in the case of an extracted public key or certificate
– PKCS#12 in the case of an extracted certificate with a private key. The keystore
password of the PKCS#12 file is the same password that was used in the -
keypass parameter of the import command
• -clients
Presents a list of all the security clients defined in the system that can accept public
keys.
MEKeyTool Summary
Managing Keys and Certificates D-7
MEKeyTool Summary
D-8 Developer’s Guide
E
OEM Extensions
This chapter describes the OEM Extensions, which provide a mechanism to add
extensions to the binary runtime of the Oracle Java ME Embedded software.
Using OEM Extensions
The Oracle Java ME Embedded software enables you to extend the binary runtime by
making your own Java packages available to IMlets as OEM extensions. You specify
the location of the JAR files that contain your packages in a configuration file and
IMlets can use those packages at run time.
To make your packages available to IMlets as OEM Extensions, follow these steps:
1. Write the Java classes in your package.
2. Compile your classes.
3. Preverify your classes.
4. Create a JAR file that contains your classes.
5. Add the JAR file to the configuration file jwc_properties.ini.
a. Edit the file jwc_properties.ini. This file is located in runtimes/
meep/bin/jwc_properties.ini in the Windows distribution and in
java/jwc_properties.ini in the distribution for the reference board.
b. Locate the line that contains the configuration setting extraclasspath.
c. Add the location of your JAR file. Use a semicolon between paths if you have
more than one JAR file, for example:
extraclasspath = C:/myjar1.jar;C:/myjar2.jar
Note:
You must use forward slashes in the paths in extraclasspath.
6. Share the JAR file and the details of your packages with the IMlet programmers
that need to use your classes.
OEM Extensions E-1
Using OEM Extensions
E-2 Developer’s Guide
F
Encryption Algorithms
The Java ME 8 product includes the following supported cipher suites and encryption
algorithms, with specified key lengths.
Supported Algorithms for Windows, Linux, and Raspberry Pi Platforms
TLSv1.0-1.2 are supported with the following configurations.
Note:
The following cipher suites are disabled by default but can be enabled in the
jwc_properties.ini file by modifying the
SSL_FORBIDDEN_CIPHERS_FILTER property:
1) TLS_ECDH_anon_* : these are non-secure anonymous cipher suites. In
order to enable these, replace ":!aNULL" with ":aNULL" in the properties file.
2) *_WITH_NULL_* : these are non-secure unencrypted cipher suites. In
order to enable these, replace ":!eNULL" with ":eNULL" in the properties file.
TLSv1.0 - TLSv1.2
Refer to the list of cipher suites in the priority ordering.
TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA384
TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA384
TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
TLS_ECDH_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
TLS_ECDH_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
TLS_ECDH_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA384
TLS_ECDH_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA384
TLS_ECDH_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
TLS_ECDH_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA256
TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
TLS_PSK_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA256
TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA256
TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
TLS_ECDH_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
TLS_ECDH_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
Encryption Algorithms F-1
TLS_ECDH_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA256
TLS_ECDH_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA256
TLS_ECDH_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
TLS_ECDH_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA256
TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
SSL_RSA_WITH_IDEA_CBC_SHA
TLS_PSK_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA
TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA
TLS_ECDH_RSA_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA
TLS_ECDH_ECDSA_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA
SSL_RSA_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA
TLS_PSK_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA
SSL_RSA_WITH_DES_CBC_SHA
SSL_RSA_EXPORT_WITH_DES40_CBC_SHA
Supported Algorithms for Windows, Linux, and Raspberry Pi Platforms
F-2 Developer’s Guide
Glossary
Access Point
A network-connectivity configuration that is predefined on a device. An access point
can represent different network profiles for the same bearer type, or for different
bearer types that may be available on a device, such as WiFi or bluetooth.
ADC
Analog-to-Digital Converter. A hardware device that converts analog signals (time
and amplitude) into a stream of binary numbers that can be processed by a digital
device.
AMS
Application Management System. The system functionality that completes tasks such
as installing applications, updating applications, and managing applications between
foreground and background.
APDU
Application Protocol Data Unit. A communication mechanism used by SIM Cards and
smart cards to communicate with card reader software or a card reader device.
API
Application Programming Interface. A set of classes used by programmers to write
applications that provide standard methods and interfaces and eliminate the need for
programmers to reinvent commonly used code.
ARM
Advanced RISC Machine. A family of computer processors using reduced instruction
set (RISC) CPU technology, developed by ARM Holdings. ARM is a licensable
instruction set architecture (ISA) and is used in the majority of embedded platforms.
AT commands
A set of commands developed to facilitate modem communications, such as dialing,
hanging up, and changing the parameters of a connection. Also known as the Hayes
command set, AT means attention.
Glossary-1
AXF
ARM Executable Format. An ARM executable image generated by ARM tools.
BIP
Bearer Independent Protocol. Allows an application on a SIM Card to establish a data
channel with a terminal, and through the terminal, to a remote server on the network.
CDMA
Code Division Multiple Access. A mobile telephone network standard used primarily
in the United States and Canada as an alternative to GSM.
CLDC
Connected Limited Device Configuration. A Java ME platform configuration for
devices with limited memory and network connectivity. It uses a low-footprint Java
virtual machine such as the CLDC HotSpot Implementation, and several minimalist
Java platform APIs for application services.
Configuration
Defines the minimum Java runtime environment (for example, the combination of a
Java virtual machine and a core set of Java platform APIs) for a family of Java ME
platform devices.
DAC
Digital-to-Analog Converter. A hardware device that converts a stream of binary
numbers into an analog signal (time and amplitude), such as audio playback.
ETSI
European Telecommunications Standards Institute. An independent, non-profit group
responsible for the standardization of information and communication technologies
within Europe. Although based in Europe, it carries worldwide influence in the
telecommunications industry.
GCF
Generic Connection Framework. A part of CLDC, it is a Java ME API consisting of a
hierarchy of interfaces and classes to create connections (such as HTTP, datagram, or
streams) and perform I/O.
GPIO
General Purpose Input/Output. Unassigned pins on an embedded platform that can
be assigned or configured as needed by a developer.
AXF
Glossary-2
GPIO Port
A group of GPIO pins (typically 8 pins) arranged in a group and treated as a single
port.
GSM
Global System for Mobile Communications. A 3G mobile telephone network standard
used widely in Europe, Asia, and other parts of the world.
HTTP
HyperText Transfer Protocol. The most commonly used Internet protocol, based on
TCP/IP that is used to fetch documents and other hypertext objects from remote hosts.
HTTPS
Secure HyperText Transfer Protocol. A protocol for transferring encrypted hypertext
data using Secure Socket Layer (SSL) technology.
ICCID
Integrated Circuit Card Identification. The unique serial number assigned to an
individual SIM Card.
IMP-NG
Information Module Profile Next Generation. A profile for embedded "headless"
devices, the IMP-NG specification (JSR 228) is a subset of MIDP 2.0 that leverages
many of the APIs of MIDP 2.0, including the latest security and networking+, but does
not include graphics and user interface APIs.
IMEI
International Mobile Equipment Identifier. A number unique to every mobile phone. It
is used by a GSM or UMTS network to identify valid devices and can be used to stop a
stolen or blocked phone from accessing the network. It is usually printed inside the
battery compartment of the phone.
IMlet
An application written for IMP-NG. An IMlet does not differ from MIDP 2.0 MIDlet,
except by the fact that an IMlet can not refer to MIDP classes that are not part of IMPNG. An IMlet can only use the APIs defined by the IMP-NG and CLDC specifications.
IMlet Suite
A way of packaging one or more IMlets for easy distribution and use. Similar to a
MIDlet suite, but for smaller applications running in an embedded environment.
IMlet Suite
Glossary-3
IMSI
International Mobile Subscriber Identity. A unique number associated with all GSM
and UMTS network mobile phone users. It is stored on the SIM Card inside a phone
and is used to identify itself to the network.
I2C
Inter-Integrated Circuit. A multi-master, serial computer bus used to attach low-speed
peripherals to an embedded platform
ISA
Instruction Set Architecture. The part of a computer's architecture related to
programming, including data type, addressing modes, interrupt and exception
handling, I/O, and memory architecture, and native commands. Reduced instruction
set computing (RISC) is one kind of instruction set architecture.
JAD file
Java Application Descriptor file. A file provided in a MIDlet suite that contains
attributes used by application management software (AMS) to manage the MIDlet's
life cycle, and other application-specific attributes used by the MIDlet suite itself.
JAR file
Java Archive file. A platform-independent file format that aggregates many files into
one. Multiple applications written in the Java programming language and their
required components (class files, images, sounds, and other resource files) can be
bundled in a JAR file and provided as part of a MIDlet suite.
JCP
Java Community Process. The global standards body guiding the development of the
Java programming language.
JDTS
Java Device Test Suite. A set of Java programming language tests developed
specifically for the wireless marketplace, providing targeted, standardized testing for
CLDC and MIDP on small and handheld devices.
Java ME platform
Java Platform, Micro Edition. A group of specifications and technologies that pertain
to running the Java platform on small devices, such as cell phones, pagers, set-top
boxes, and embedded devices. More specifically, the Java ME platform consists of a
configuration (such as CLDC) and a profile (such as MIDP or IMP-NG) tailored to a
specific class of device.
IMSI
Glossary-4
JSR
Java Specification Request. A proposal for developing new Java platform technology,
which is reviewed, developed, and finalized into a formal specification by the JCP
program.
Java Virtual Machine
A software “execution engine" that safely and compatibly executes the byte codes in
Java class files on a microprocessor.
KVM
A Java virtual machine designed to run in a small, limited memory device. The CLDC
configuration was initially designed to run in a KVM.
LCDUI
Liquid Crystal Display User Interface. A user interface toolkit for interacting with
Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) screens in small devices. More generally, a shorthand
way of referring to the MIDP user interface APIs.
MIDlet
An application written for MIDP.
MIDlet suite
A way of packaging one or more MIDlets for easy distribution and use. Each MIDlet
suite contains a Java application descriptor file (.jad), which lists the class names and
files names for each MIDlet, and a Java Archive file (.jar), which contains the class
files and resource files for each MIDlet.
MIDP
Mobile Information Device Profile. A specification for a Java ME platform profile,
running on top of a CLDC configuration that provides APIs for application life cycle,
user interface, networking, and persistent storage in small devices.
MSISDN
Mobile Station Integrated Services Digital Network. A number uniquely identifying a
subscription in a GSM or UMTS mobile network. It is the telephone number to the SIM
Card in a mobile phone and used for voice, FAX, SMS, and data services.
MVM
Multiple Virtual Machines. A software mode that can run more than one MIDlet or
IMlet at a time.
MVM
Glossary-5
Obfuscation
A technique used to complicate code by making it harder to understand when it is
decompiled. Obfuscation makes it harder to reverse-engineer applications and
therefore, steal them.
Optional Package
A set of Java ME platform APIs that provides additional functionality by extending the
runtime capabilities of an existing configuration and profile.
Preemption
Taking a resource, such as the foreground, from another application.
Preverification
Due to limited memory and processing power on small devices, the process of
verifying Java technology classes is split into two parts. The first part is preverification
which is done off-device using the preverify tool. The second part, which is
verification, occurs on the device at runtime.
Profile
A set of APIs added to a configuration to support specific uses of an embedded or
mobile device. Along with its underlying configuration, a profile defines a complete
and self-contained application environment.
Provisioning
A mechanism for providing services, data, or both to an embedded or mobile device
over a network.
Pulse Counter
A hardware or software component that counts electronic pulses, or events, on a
digital input line, for example, a GPIO pin.
Push Registry
The list of inbound connections, across which entities can push data. Each item in the
list contains the URL (protocol, host, and port) for the connection, the entity permitted
to push data through the connection, and the application that receives the connection.
RISC
Reduced Instruction Set Computing. A CPU design based on simplified instruction
sets that provide higher performance and faster execution of individual instructions.
The ARM architecture is based on RISC design principles.
Obfuscation
Glossary-6
RL-ARM
Real-Time Library. A group of tightly coupled libraries designed to solve the real-time
and communication challenges of embedded systems based on ARM processor-based
microcontroller devices.
RMI
Remote Method Invocation. A feature of Java SE technology that enables Java
technology objects running in one virtual machine to seamlessly invoke objects
running in another virtual machine.
RMS
Record Management System. A simple record-oriented database that enables an IMlet
or MIDlet to persistently store information and retrieve it later. MIDlets can also use
the RMS to share data.
RTOS
Real-Time Operating System. An operating system designed to serve real-time
application requests. It uses multi-tasking, an advanced scheduling algorithm, and
minimal latency to prioritize and process data.
RTSP
Real Time Streaming Protocol. A network control protocol designed to control
streaming media servers and media sessions.
SCWS
Smart Card Web Server. A web server embedded in a smart card (such as a SIM Card)
that allows HTTP transactions with the card.
SD card
Secure Digital cards. A non-volatile memory card format for use in portable devices,
such as mobile phones and digital cameras, and embedded systems. SD cards come in
three different sizes, with several storage capacities and speeds.
SIM
Subscriber Identity Module. An integrated circuit embedded into a removable SIM
card that securely stores the International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) and the
related key used to identify and authenticate subscribers on mobile and embedded
devices.
Slave Mode
Describes the relationship between a master and one or more devices in a Serial
Peripheral Interface (SPI) bus arrangement. Data transmission in an SPI bus is initiated
by the master device and received by one or more slave devices, which cannot initiate
data transmissions on their own.
Slave Mode
Glossary-7
Smart Card
A card that stores and processes information through the electronic circuits embedded
in silicon in the substrate of its body. Smart cards carry both processing power and
information. A SIM Card is a special kind of smart card for use in a mobile device.
SMS
Short Message Service. A protocol allowing transmission of short text-based messages
over a wireless network. SMS messaging is the most widely-used data application in
the world.
SMSC
Short Message Service Center. The SMSC routes messages and regulates SMS traffic.
When an SMS message is sent, it goes to an SMS center first, then gets forwarded to
the destination. If the destination is unavailable (for example, the recipient embedded
board is powered down), the message is stored in the SMSC until the recipient
becomes available.
SOAP
Simple Object Access Protocol. An XML-based protocol that enables objects of any
type to communicate in a distributed environment. It is most commonly used to
develop web services.
SPI
Serial Peripheral Interface. A synchronous bus commonly used in embedded systems
that allows full-duplex communication between a master device and one or more
slave devices.
SSL
Secure Sockets Layer. A protocol for transmitting data over the Internet using
encryption and authentication, including the use of digital certificates and both public
and private keys.
SVM
Single Virtual Machine. A software mode that can run only one MIDlet or IMlet at a
time.
Task
At the platform level, each separate application that runs within a single Java virtual
machine is called a task. The API used to instantiate each task is a stripped-down
version of the Isolate API defined in JSR 121.
TCP/IP
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol. A fundamental Internet protocol
that provides for reliable delivery of streams of data from one host to another.
Smart Card
Glossary-8
Terminal Profile
Device characteristics of a terminal (mobile or embedded device) passed to the SIM
Card along with the IMEI at SIM Card initialization. The terminal profile tells the SIM
Card what values are supported by the device.
UART
Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter. A piece of computer hardware that
translates data between serial and parallel formats. It is used to facilitate
communication between different kinds of peripheral devices, input/output streams,
and embedded systems, to ensure universal communication between devices.
UICC
Universal Integrated Circuit Card. The smart card used in mobile terminals in GSM
and UMTS networks. The UICC ensures the integrity and security of personal data on
the card.
UMTS
Universal Mobile Telecommunications System. A third-generation (3G) mobile
communications technology. It utilizes the radio spectrum in a fundamentally
different way than GSM.
URI
Uniform Resource Identifier. A compact string of characters used to identify or name
an abstract or physical resource. A URI can be further classified as a uniform resource
locator (URL), a uniform resource name (URN), or both.
USAT
Universal SIM Application Toolkit. A software development kit intended for 3G
networks. It enables USIM to initiate actions that can be used for various value-added
services, such as those required for banking and other privacy related applications.
USB
Universal Serial Bus. An industry standard that defines the cables, connectors, and
protocols used in a bus for connection, communication, and power supply between
computers and electronic devices, such as embedded platforms and mobile phones.
USIM
Universal Subscriber Identity Module. An updated version of a SIM designed for use
over 3G networks. USIM is able to process small applications securely using better
cryptographic authentication and stronger keys. Larger memory on USIM enables the
addition of thousands of contact details including subscriber information, contact
details, and other custom settings.
USIM
Glossary-9
WAE
Wireless Application Environment. An application framework for small devices,
which leverages other technologies, such as Wireless Application Protocol (WAP).
WAP
Wireless Application Protocol. A protocol for transmitting data between a server and a
client (such as a cell phone or embedded device) over a wireless network. WAP in the
wireless world is analogous to HTTP in the World Wide Web.
Watchdog Timer
A dedicated piece of hardware or software that "watches" an embedded system for a
fault condition by continually polling for a response. If the system goes offline and no
response is received, the watchdog timer initiates a reboot procedure or takes other
steps to return the system to a running state.
WCDMA
Wideband Code Division Multiple Access. A detailed protocol that defines how a
mobile phone communicates with the tower, how its signals are modulated, how
datagrams are structured, and how system interfaces are specified.
WMA
Wireless Messaging API. A set of classes for sending and receiving Short Message
Service (SMS) messages.
XML Schema
A set of rules to which an XML document must conform to be considered valid.

WAE
Glossary-10




5TH EDITION
FIRST AID
MANUAL

Medical Editor-in-Chief Gina M. Piazza, DO, FACEP
FIRST AID
MANUAL
5TH EDITION
LONDON, NEW YORK, MUNICH, MELBOURNE, DELHI
DORLING KINDERSLEY
Text revised in line with the latest guidelines from the Resuscitation Council (US).
Fifth edition first published in the United States in 2014 by
DK Publishing, 4th floor, 345 Hudson Street, New York, NY 10014
14 15 16 17 18 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
001–192570–September/2014
Text copyright © 2014 St. John Ambulance;
St. Andrew’s First Aid; The British Red Cross Society
Illustration copyright © 2014 Dorling Kindersley Limited, except as listed in acknowledgments on p.288.
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise),
without the prior written permission of the copyright owner.
Published in Great Britain by Dorling Kindersley Limited.
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN: 978-1-4654-1950-7
DK books are available at special discounts when purchased in bulk for sales promotions, premiums, fund-raising,
or educational use. For details, contact: DK Publishing Special Markets, 345 Hudson Street,
New York, New York 10014 or SpecialSales@dk.com.
Printed and bound in China by Leo
Discover more at
www.dk.com
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF EMERGENCY PHYSICIANS
Consultant editor
Jemima Dunne
Senior editor
Janet Mohun
Jacket editor
Maud Whatley
US senior editor
Margaret Parrish
US editor
Jill Hamilton
Pre-production producer
Francesca Wardell
Managing editor
Angeles Gavira Guerrero
Publisher
Sarah Larter
Associate publishing director
Liz Wheeler
Senior art editor
Spencer Holbrook
Jacket designer
Duncan Turner
Producer
Vivienne Yong
Photography
Gerard Brown,
Vanessa Davies,
Ruth Jenkinson
Jacket design development manager
Sophia MTT
Managing art editor
Michelle Baxter
Art director
Philip Ormerod
Publishing director
Jonathan Metcalf
Medical Editor-in-Chief
Gina M. Piazza, DO, FACEP
Associate Executive Director,
Membership and Education Division
Robert Heard, MBA, CAE
Director, Educational Products
Marta Foster
FOREWORD
THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF EMERGENCY
PHYSICIANS (ACEP)
The goal of the American College of Emergency
Physicians (ACEP) is to support high-quality
emergency care throughout our country. More than
130 million persons come to hospital emergency
departments every year, seeking care for
everything from mild illnesses and injuries to lifethreatening conditions. Emergency care is provided
in a continuum that starts with the bystander who
first recognizes a problem and begins treatment,
through the care rendered by emergency medical
services (EMS) personnel, to the care provided in
hospital emergency departments nationwide.
Either directly or indirectly, every citizen is affected
by injury or illness at some point. It is important for all of us to be able to
recognize emergency medical events and to possess the basic knowledge and
skills necessary to summon appropriate help and to provide basic care until that
help arrives. The goal of this manual is to instruct you in these basic skills and to
provide you with the knowledge you need to make a positive difference in the
life of any ill or injured person to whom you give aid.
This manual discusses what to do for the common, mild, serious, and lifethreatening situations you may face, in a step-by-step-manner, using illustrations
and photographs to help you understand the problem at hand. Although it is
designed to provide you with a good knowledge base, it is strongly encouraged
that you also take a formal first aid course from an organization in your
community that provides such training. These organizations include the
American Red Cross, the American Heart Association, EMS agencies, and local
hospitals. It is also recommended that you refresh your skills on a regular basis.
On behalf of ACEP and emergency medicine specialists throughout the United
States, it is my pleasure to bring this fifth edition of the ACEP First Aid Manual to
you. I hope that you will enjoy learning how to help those in need of emergency
care and that you will gain confidence in your knowledge and skills as you
proceed through the book.
Thanks for joining the emergency care team—you can make a difference!
Gina M. Piazza, DO, FACEP
Medical Editor-in-Chief
GINA M. PIAZZA, DO, FACEP
MEDICAL EDITOR-IN-CHIEF
CONTENTS
What is a first aider? ________________________________________ 14
How to prepare yourself ___________________________________ 15
Protection from infection ________________________________ 16
Dealing with a casualty ____________________________________ 19
Requesting help ________________________________________________ 22
The use of medication ______________________________________ 24
Remember your own needs _____________________________ 24
26
Assessing the sick or injured __________________________ 40
Mechanisms of injury _____________________________________ 42
Primary survey ________________________________________________ 44
Secondary survey ____________________________________________ 46
Head-to-toe examination _______________________________ 49
Monitoring vital signs ______________________________________ 52
38
54
Breathing and circulation ________________________________ 56
Life-saving priorities ________________________________________ 57
Unconscious adult ___________________________________________ 62
Unconscious child ____________________________________________ 72
Unconscious infant _________________________________________ 80
How to use an AED __________________________________________ 84
88
The respiratory system ___________________________________ 90
Hypoxia ____________________________________________________________ 92
Airway obstruction __________________________________________ 93
Choking adult __________________________________________________ 94
Choking child ___________________________________________________ 95
Choking infant ________________________________________________ 96
Hanging and strangulation ______________________________ 97
Inhalation of fumes __________________________________________ 98
10
Action at an emergency ___________________________________ 28
Traffic accidents _______________________________________________30
Fires __________________________________________________________________ 32
Electrical incidents ___________________________________________ 34
Water incidents ________________________________________________ 36
Major incident/Mass casualties ______________________ 37 RESPIRATORY
PROBLEMS
MANAGING AN
INCIDENT
BECOMING A
FIRST AIDER
ASSESSING
A CASUALTY
INTRODUCTION
THE UNCONSCIOUS
CASUALTY
1 12
2
3
5
4
Drowning _______________________________________________________100
Hyperventilation ____________________________________________ 101
Asthma ___________________________________________________________ 102
Croup ______________________________________________________________ 103
Penetrating chest wound ______________________________ 104
106
The heart and blood vessels __________________________ 108
Bleeding and types of wound ________________________ 110
Shock _______________________________________________________________ 112
Severe external bleeding ________________________________ 114
Internal bleeding _____________________________________________ 116
Impalement _____________________________________________________ 117
Amputation _____________________________________________________ 117
Crush injury _____________________________________________________ 118
Cuts and scrapes ______________________________________________ 119
Bruising ___________________________________________________________ 119
Blisters ___________________________________________________________ 120
Infected wound ______________________________________________ 120
Foreign object in a wound ______________________________ 121
Scalp and head wounds __________________________________122
Eye wound _______________________________________________________123
Bleeding from the ear _____________________________________123
Nosebleed _______________________________________________________124
Knocked-out adult tooth _______________________________ 125
Bleeding from the mouth _______________________________ 125
Finger wound __________________________________________________126
Wound to the palm ________________________________________ 127
Wound at a joint crease _________________________________ 127
Abdominal wound ___________________________________________128
Vaginal bleeding ______________________________________________128
Bleeding varicose vein ____________________________________129
130
The skeleton ___________________________________________________ 132
Bones, muscles, and joints ______________________________134
Fractures ________________________________________________________ 136
Dislocated joint ______________________________________________ 139
Strains and Sprains ________________________________________ 140
The nervous system ________________________________________142
Head injury ______________________________________________________144
Facial injury _____________________________________________________146
Lower jaw injury ______________________________________________147
Cheekbone and nose injury ____________________________147
Collarbone injury _____________________________________________148
Shoulder injury ________________________________________________149
Upper arm injury _____________________________________________150
Elbow injury ______________________________________________________151
Forearm and wrist injuries ______________________________ 152
Hand and finger injuries _________________________________ 153
Rib injury __________________________________________________________154
Fractured pelvis _______________________________________________ 155
Back pain ________________________________________________________ 156
Spinal injury ____________________________________________________ 157
Hip and thigh injuries ____________________________________ 160
Lower leg injuries ___________________________________________ 162
Knee injury ______________________________________________________ 164
BONE, JOINT,
WOUNDS AND MUSCLE INJURIES 6 AND CIRCULATION
7
MEDICAL
CONDITIONS 208
Foreign object in the eye ________________________________196
Foreign object in the ear _________________________________197
Foreign object in the nose ______________________________197
How poisons affect the body __________________________198
Types of poisons _____________________________________________199
Swallowed poisons _______________________________________ 200
Drug poisoning ______________________________________________ 201
Alcohol poisoning _________________________________________ 202
Animal and human bites _______________________________ 203
Insect sting ____________________________________________________ 204
Tick bite _________________________________________________________ 205
Other bites and stings __________________________________ 205
Snake bite ______________________________________________________ 206
Stings from sea creatures _____________________________ 207
Marine puncture wound _______________________________ 207
Angina ____________________________________________________________ 210
Heart attack ____________________________________________________ 211
Stroke _____________________________________________________________ 212
Diabetes mellitus ___________________________________________ 214
Hyperglycemia _______________________________________________ 214
Hypoglycemia ________________________________________________ 215
Seizures in adults ___________________________________________ 216
Seizures in children ________________________________________ 218
Fever _______________________________________________________________ 219
Meningitis _____________________________________________________ 220
The skin __________________________________________________________ 170
Assessing a burn ____________________________________________ 172
Severe burns and scalds ________________________________ 174
Minor burns and scalds _________________________________ 176
Burns to the airway _________________________________________ 177
Electrical burn _________________________________________________ 178
Chemical burn ________________________________________________ 179
Chemical burn to the eye ______________________________ 180
Flash burn to the eye ______________________________________ 181
Incapacitant spray exposure __________________________ 181
Dehydration ___________________________________________________ 182
Sunburn __________________________________________________________ 183
Heat exhaustion _____________________________________________ 184
Heatstroke ______________________________________________________ 185
Hypothermia __________________________________________________ 186
Frostbite _________________________________________________________ 189
The sensory organs _________________________________________192
Splinter ____________________________________________________________194
Embedded fishhook _______________________________________ 195
Swallowed foreign object ______________________________ 195
Ankle injury ____________________________________________________ 165
Foot and toe injuries _______________________________________166
Cramps ___________________________________________________________ 167
168
190
EFFECTS OF
HEAT AND COLD
FOREIGN OBJECTS,
POISONING, BITES & STINGS
8
9
10
Fainting __________________________________________________________ 221
Allergy ____________________________________________________________ 222
Anaphylactic shock ________________________________________ 223
Headache _______________________________________________________ 224
Migraine _________________________________________________________ 224
Sore throat _____________________________________________________ 225
Earache and toothache __________________________________ 225
Abdominal pain ______________________________________________ 226
Vomiting and diarrhea ___________________________________ 227
Childbirth _______________________________________________________ 228
Emergency childbirth _____________________________________ 229
Removing clothing _________________________________________ 232
Removing headgear _______________________________________ 233
Casualty handling __________________________________________ 234
First aid materials __________________________________________ 235
Dressings ________________________________________________________ 238
Cold compresses ____________________________________________ 241
Principles of bandaging _________________________________ 242
Roller bandages ____________________________________________ 244
Tubular gauze bandages ________________________________ 248
Triangular bandages _______________________________________249
Square knots __________________________________________________250
Hand and foot cover ______________________________________250
Arm sling _________________________________________________________251
Elevation sling ________________________________________________ 252
Improvised slings ___________________________________________ 253
Action in an emergency _________________________________ 256
CPR for an adult _____________________________________________ 258
Chest-compression-only CPR ________________________ 258
CPR for a child ______________________________________________ 260
CPR for an infant ___________________________________________ 260
Heart attack __________________________________________________ 262
Stroke _____________________________________________________________ 262
Choking adult ________________________________________________ 264
Choking child ________________________________________________ 264
Choking infant ______________________________________________ 266
Meningitis _____________________________________________________ 266
Asthma ___________________________________________________________ 268
Anaphylactic shock ________________________________________ 268
Severe external bleeding ______________________________ 270
Shock _____________________________________________________________ 270
Head injury _____________________________________________________ 272
Spinal injury ____________________________________________________ 272
Broken bones _________________________________________________ 274
Burns and scalds ____________________________________________ 274
Seizures in adults ___________________________________________ 276
Seizures in children ________________________________________ 276
Swallowed poisons _________________________________________ 278
Hypoglycemia ________________________________________________ 278
First aid regulations _________________________________ 280
Index ________________________________________________________ 282
Acknowledgments ____________________________________288
TECHNIQUES
AND EQUIPMENT
EMERGENCY
FIRST AID
230
254
11
12
10
INTRODUCTION
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
This manual, now in its fifth edition, is published
in collaboration with the American College of
Emergency Physicians (ACEP). The content is
based upon guidelines of the American Heart
Association and the American Red Cross. ACEP
makes every effort to ensure that its reviewers
are knowledgeable content experts. Readers are
nevertheless advised that the statements and
opinions in this publication are recommendations
at the time of publication and should not be
construed as official ACEP policy nor should the
materials contained here be regarded as a
substitute for medical advice. ACEP is not
responsible for, and expressly disclaims all
liability for, damages of any kind arising out of
use, reference to, reliance on, or performance of
such information. The materials contained herein
are not intended to establish policy, procedure,
or a standard of care. First aiders are advised to
obtain training from a qualified trainer and keep
their certification current, and to recognize the
limits of their competence.
The first three chapters provide background
information to help you manage a situation
safely and learn how to assess a sick or injured
person. Treatment for injuries and conditions
is given in the chapters that follow, which are
grouped by body system or the type of injury.
The final chapter provides a quick-reference
guide to emergency first aid.
The chapters are grouped by body system
or cause of injury. Within the sections there
are easy-to-understand anatomy features
that explain the risks involved with particular
injuries or conditions and how and why first
aid can help.
ANATOMY
INTRODUCTION
Color-coded chapters help
you find relevant sections
easily
Introduction gives an
overview of the anatomy
for the section
Clear, computer-generated
artworks of body systems
illustrate each section
Additional artworks
provide extra information
108 109
THE HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS
KEY
KEY
The heart and the blood vessels make up the
circulatory system. These structures supply the
body with a constant flow of blood, which
brings oxygen and nutrients to the tissues and
carries waste products away.
Blood is pumped around the body by
rhythmic contractions (beats) of the heart
muscle. The blood runs through a network
of vessels, divided into three types: arteries,
veins, and capillaries. The force that is
exerted by the blood flow through the main
arteries is called blood pressure. The pressure
varies with the strength and phase of the
heartbeat, the elasticity of the arterial
walls, and the volume and thickness
of the blood.
The heart pumps blood by muscular
contractions called heartbeats, which are
controlled by electrical impulses generated
in the heart. Each beat has three phases:
diastole, when the blood enters the heart; atrial
systole, when it is squeezed out of the atria
(collecting chambers); and ventricular systole,
when blood leaves the heart.
In diastole, the heart relaxes. Oxygenated
blood from the lungs flows through the
pulmonary veins into the left atrium. Blood that
has given up its oxygen to body tissues
(deoxygenated blood) flows from the venae
cavae (large veins that enter the heart) into the
right atrium.
In atrial systole, the two atria contract and
the valves between the atria and the ventricles
(pumping chambers) open so that blood flows
into the ventricles.
During ventricular systole, the ventricles
contract. The thick-walled left ventricle forces
blood into the aorta (main artery), which carries
it to the rest of the body. The right ventricle
pumps blood into the pulmonary arteries, which
carry it to the lungs to collect more oxygen.
HOW THE HEART FUNCTIONS
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION THE HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS
How blood circulates
Oxygenated blood passes
from the lungs to the heart,
then travels to body tissues via the
arteries. Blood that has given up its
oxygen (deoxygenated blood) returns
to the heart through the veins.
Capillary networks
A network of fine blood vessels
(capillaries) links arteries and veins within
body tissues. Oxygen and nutrients pass
from the blood into the tissues; waste
products pass from the tissues into the
blood, through capillaries. The heart
This muscular organ pumps blood
around the body and then to the
lungs to pick up oxygen. Coronary
blood vessels supply the heart
muscle with oxygen and nutrients.
Carotid artery
Brachial vein
Jugular vein
Aorta
Heart
muscle
Superior
vena cava
Coronary
artery
Inferior
vena cava
Capillary
Small artery
(arteriole)
Small vein
(venule)
Radial vein
Femoral vein
Pulmonary arteries carry
deoxygenated blood to
lungs
Pulmonary veins carry
oxygenated blood from
lungs to heart
Heart pumps blood around
body
Vena cava carries
deoxygenated blood from
body tissues to heart
Brachial artery
Radial artery
Femoral artery
Aorta carries oxygenated
blood to body tissues
Pulmonary
artery
Blood flow through the heart
The heart’s right side pumps deoxygenated blood from
the body to the lungs. The left side pumps oxygenated
blood to the body via the aorta.
The blood cells
Red blood cells contain hemoglobin,
a red pigment that enables the cells
to carry oxygen. White blood cells
play a role in defending the body
against infection. Platelets help
blood clot.
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Valve
Left
ventricle
White blood cell
Platelet
Left atrium
Ascending aorta carries
blood to upper body
Superior vena
cava carries
blood from
upper body
Inferior vena
cava carries
blood from
lower body
Descending aorta carries
blood to lower body
Pulmonary arteries
carry deoxygenated
blood to lungs
Red blood cell
There are about 10 pints (5 liters), or 1 pint
per 14 pounds of body weight (1 liter per
13 kg), of blood in the average adult body.
Roughly 55 percent of the blood is clear yellow
fluid (plasma). In this fluid are suspended the
red and white blood cells and the platelets, all of
which make up the remaining 45 percent.
COMPOSITION OF BLOOD
Vessels carrying oxygenated blood
Vessels carrying oxygenated blood
Vessels carrying deoxygenated blood
Vessels carrying deoxygenated blood
11
176 177
EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD MINOR BURNS AND SCALDS | BURNS TO THE AIRWAY
MINOR BURNS AND SCALDS BURNS TO THE AIRWAY
SEE ALSO Hypoxia p.92 | Shock pp.112–13 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
■ Reddened skin
■ Pain in the area of the burn
Later there may be:
■ Blistering of the affected skin
There may be:
 ■ Soot around the nose or mouth
 ■ Singeing of the nasal hairs
 ■ Redness, swelling, or actual burning
of the tongue
 ■ Damage to the skin around
the mouth
 ■ Hoarseness of the voice
 ■ Breathing difficulties
■ To stop the burning
■ To relieve pain and swelling
■ To minimize the risk of infection
 ■ To maintain an open airway
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
RECOGNITION
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
YOUR AIMS
Small, superficial burns and scalds are often due to domestic
incidents, such as touching a hot iron or oven rack. Most minor
burns can be treated successfully by first aid and will heal
naturally. However, you should advise the casualty to seek
medical advice if you are at all concerned about the severity of
the injury (Assessing a burn, pp.172–73).
After a burn, blisters may form. These thin “bubbles” are
caused by tissue fluid leaking into the burned area just beneath
the skin’s surface. You should never break a blister caused by a
burn because you may introduce infection into the wound.
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO Call 911 for emergency help. Tell the dispatcher that you suspect
Flood the injured part burns to the casualty’s airway.
with cold water for at least
ten minutes or until the pain
is relieved. If water is not
available, any cold, harmless
liquid, such as milk, can
be used.
Reassure the casualty. Monitor and record vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)—while waiting for
help to arrive.
Take or send the casualty to
the hospital if the casualty is
a child, or if you are in any doubt
about the casualty’s condition.
Take any steps possible to improve the casualty’s air supply, such
as loosening clothing around his neck.
Gently remove any
jewelry, watches, belts, or
constricting clothing from the
injured area before it begins
to swell.
Offer the casualty ice or small sips of cold water to reduce
swelling and pain.
When the burn is cooled,
cover it with plastic wrap or
place a clean plastic bag over a
foot or hand. Apply the wrap
lengthwise over the burn, not
around the limb because the
tissues swell. If you do not have
plastic wrap or a plastic bag, use a
sterile dressing or a gauze pad,
bandaged loosely in place.
4
4
2
2
1
1
3
3
Any burn to the face, mouth, or throat is very serious because
the air passages may become swollen. Usually, signs of burning,
such as soot or singed nasal hairs, is evident. Suspect damage to
the airway if a casualty sustains burns in a confined space—he is
likely to have inhaled hot air or gases.
There is no specific first aid treatment for an extreme case of
burns to the airway; the swelling will rapidly block the airway,
and there is a serious risk of hypoxia. Immediate and specialized
medical help is required.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness, open the airway
and check breathing (The
unconscious casualty pp.54–87).
 ■ Do not break blisters or
otherwise interfere with
the injured area.
 ■ Do not apply adhesive dressings
or adhesive tape to the skin
because removing them may
tear damaged skin.
 ■ Do not apply any ointments
other than antibiotic ones
such as bacitracin—they may
damage tissues.
 ■ The use of specialized dressings,
sprays, and gels to cool burns is
not recommended.
 ■ Do not put blister bandages on
blisters caused by a burn.
Never burst a blister; they
usually need no treatment.
However, if a blister breaks or is
likely to burst, cover it with a
nonadhesive sterile dressing that
extends well beyond the edges
of the blister. Leave the dressing
in place until the blister subsides.
SPECIAL CASE BLISTERS
SEE ALSO Assessing a burn pp.172–73
CAUTION CAUTION
INTRODUCTION | HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
The main part of the book features eight colorcoded chapters outlining first aid for more
than 110 conditions or injuries. For each entry,
there is an introduction that describe the risks
and likely cause, then first aid treatment is
shown in clear step-by-step instructions.
At the back of the manual is a quick-reference
emergency section that provides additional
at-a-glance action plans for potentially lifethreatening injuries and conditions from
unconsciousness and bleeding to asthma
and heart attack.
CONDITIONS AND INJURIES
EMERGENCY ADVICE
Step-by-step instructions
explain each stage of treatment
Special Case boxes highlight
instances where alternative
action may be required
Lists of recognition features
help you identify a condition
Caution boxes alert you to
potential risks or alternative
treatments
Your Aims boxes summarize
purpose of first aid
Caution boxes advise on
possible complications
Every step described
illustrated for instant advice
Recognition lists
repeated to provide
quick identification
of a condition
Cross references guide you
back to the main article in
the book
274 275
EMERGENCY FIRST AID BROKEN BONES | BURNS AND SCALDS
BROKEN BONES
BURNS AND SCALDS
Help the casualty support the
affected part at the joints above
and below the injury, in the most
comfortable position.
Make the casualty comfortable by
helping him sit or lie down. Flood
the injury with cold water; cool for
at least ten minutes or until pain
is relieved.
Place padding, such as towels
or cushions, around the affected
part to support it.
Call 911 for emergency help if
necessary. Tell the dispatcher that
the injury is a burn and explain
what caused it, and the estimated
size and depth.
For extra support or if help is
delayed, secure the injured part to
an uninjured part of the body. For
upper body injuries, use a sling;
for lower limb injuries, use broadand narrow-fold bandages. Tie
knots on the uninjured side.
While you are cooling the burn,
carefully remove any clothing or
jewelry from the area before it
starts to swell; a helper can do this
for you. Do not remove anything
that is sticking to the burn.
A casualty with an arm injury
could be taken by car if not in
shock, but a leg injury should go
by ambulance, so call 911 for
emergency help. Treat for shock.
Monitor and record the casualty’s
level of response, breathing, and
pulse until help arrives.
Cover the burn with plastic wrap
placed lengthwise over the injury,
or use a plastic bag. Alternatively,
use a sterile dressing or clean
gauze pad. Monitor and record
the casualty’s level of response,
breathing, and pulse while waiting
for help.
SUPPORT
INJURED PART
START TO COOL
BURN
PROTECT INJURY
WITH PADDING
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
SUPPORT WITH
SLINGS OR
BANDAGES
REMOVE ANY
CONSTRICTIONS
TAKE OR SEND
CASUALTY TO THE
HOSPITAL
COVER BURN
FIND OUT MORE pp.136–38
FIND OUT MORE pp.174–75
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
 ■ Do not attempt to move an injured
limb unnecessarily, or if it causes
further pain.
 ■ If there is an open wound, cover it
with a sterile dressing or a clean
gauze pad and bandage it in place.
 ■ Do not give the casualty anything
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ Do not raise an injured leg when
treating a casualty for shock.
 ■ Do not apply specialized dressings,
lotions, or fat to a burn, but
bacitracin can be used on first
degree burns.
 ■ Do not use adhesive dressings.
 ■ Do not touch the burn or burst
any blisters.
 ■ If the burn is severe, treat the
casualty for shock (p.270).
 ■ If the burn is on the face, do
not cover it. Keep cooling with
water until help arrives.
 ■ If the burn is caused by contact
with chemicals, wear protective
gloves and irrigate for at least
20 minutes.
 ■ Watch the casualty for signs of
smoke inhalation, such as
difficulty breathing.
■ Distortion, swelling, and bruising at
the injury site
■ Pain and difficulty in moving the
injured part
There may be:
■ Bending, twisting, or shortening
of a limb
■ A wound, possibly with bone
ends protruding
There may be:
■ Possible areas of superficial,
partial-thickness, and/or
full-thickness burns
■ Pain in the area of the burn
■ Breathing difficulties if the airway
is affected
■ Swelling and blistering of
the skin
■ Signs of shock
RECOGNITION
RECOGNITION
CAUTION
CAUTION
Introductory text describes
background and effects of
each condition
See also references direct
you to related conditions
First aid is the initial assistance or
treatment given to a person who is
injured or suddenly becomes ill. The person
who provides this help may be a first aider,
a first responder, a policeman or fireman, or
a paramedic or EMT. This chapter prepares
you for being a first aider, psychologically
and emotionally, as well as giving practical
advice on what you should and should not
do in an emergency situation.
The information given throughout this
book will help you give effective first aid to
any casualty in any situation. However,
to become a fully competent first aider,
you should complete a recognized first aid
course and receive certification. This will
also strengthen your skills and increase
your confidence. The American Red Cross
and the American Heart Association teach
a variety of first aid courses, at different
educational levels.
 ■ To understand your own abilities and limitations.
 ■ To stay safe and calm at all times.
 ■ To assess a situation quickly and calmly and summon
the appropriate help if necessary.
 ■ To assist the casualty and provide the necessary
treatment, with the help of others if possible.
 ■ To pass on relevant information to the emergency
services, or to the person who takes responsibility for
the casualty.
 ■ To be aware of your own needs.
1
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
BECOMING A
FIRST AIDER
14
BECOMING A FIRST AIDER
WHAT IS A FIRST AIDER?
First aid refers to the actions taken in response
to someone who is injured or has suddenly
become ill. A first aider is a person who takes
action while taking care to keep everyone
involved safe (p.28) and to cause no further harm
while doing so. Follow the actions that most
benefit the casualty, taking into account your
own skills, knowledge, and experience, using the
guidelines set out in this book.
This chapter prepares you for the role of first
aider by providing guidance on responding to a
first aid situation and assessing the priorities for
the casualty. There is advice on the psychological
aspect of giving first aid and practical guidance
on how to protect yourself and the casualty.
Chapter 2, Managing an Incident (pp.26–37),
provides guidelines on dealing with events
(traffic accidents or fires, for example). Chapter
3, Assessing a Casualty (pp.38–53), looks at the
practical steps to take when assessing a sick or
injured person’s condition.
One of the primary rules of first aid is to
ensure that an area is safe for you before you
approach a casualty (p.28). Do not attempt
heroic rescues in hazardous circumstances.
If you put yourself at risk, you are unlikely to be
able to help casualties and could become one
yourself and cause harm to others. If it is not
safe, do not approach the casualty, but call 911 for
emergency help.
■ Assess a situation quickly and calmly.
■ Protect yourself and any casualties from
danger—never put yourself at risk (p.28).
■ Prevent cross-contamination between
yourself and the casualty as best as
possible (p.16).
■ Comfort and reassure casualties.
■ Assess the casualty: identify, as best as
you can, the injury or nature of illness
affecting a casualty (pp.38–53).
■ Give early treatment, and treat the casualties
with the most serious (life-threatening)
conditions first.
■ Arrange for appropriate help: call 911 for
emergency help if you suspect serious
injury or illness; take or send the casualty to
the hospital; transfer him into the care of a
healthcare professional, or to a higher level
of medical care. Stay with a casualty until
care is available.
FIRST AID PRIORITIES
Assessing an incident
When you come across an incident stay calm and
support the casualty. Ask him what has happened. Try
not to move the casualty; if possible, treat him in the
position you find him.
15
WHAT IS A FIRST AIDER? | HOW TO PREPARE YOURSELF
HOW TO PREPARE YOURSELF
When responding to an emergency you
should recognize the emotional and physical
needs of all involved, including your own. You
should look after your own psychological
health and be able to recognize stress if it
develops (pp.24–25).
A calm, considerate response from you that
engenders trust and respect from those around
you is fundamental to your being able to give
or receive information from a casualty or
witnesses effectively. This includes being aware
of, and managing, your reactions, so that you
can focus on the casualty and make an
assessment. By talking to a casualty in a kind,
considerate, gentle but firm manner, you will
inspire confidence in your actions and this will
generate trust between you and the casualty.
Without this confidence he may not tell you
about an important event, injury, or symptom,
and may remain in a highly distressed state.
The actions described in this chapter
aim to help you facilitate this trust, minimize
distress, and provide support to promote the
casualty’s ability to cope and recover. The key
steps to being an effective first aider are:
■ Be calm in your approach
■ Be aware of risks (to yourself and others)
■ Build and maintain trust (from the casualty
and the bystanders)
■ Give early treatment, treating the most
serious (life-threatening) conditions first
■ Call appropriate help
■ Remember your own needs
It is important to be calm in your approach to
providing first aid. Consider what situations
might challenge you, and how you would
deal with them. In order to convey confidence
to others and encourage them to trust you,
you need to control your own emotions
and reactions.
People often fear the unknown. Becoming
more familiar with first aid priorities and the
key techniques in this book can help you feel
more comfortable. By identifying your fears
in advance, you can take steps to overcome
them. Learn as much as you can, for example,
by enrolling in a first aid course, asking others
how they dealt with similar situations, or
talking your fears through with a person
you trust.
STAY IN CONTROL
In an emergency situation, the body responds
by releasing hormones that may cause a “fight,
flight, or freeze” response. When this happens,
your heart beats faster, your breathing quickens,
and you may sweat more. You may also feel
more alert, want to run away or feel frozen
to the spot.
If you feel overwhelmed and slightly panicky,
you may feel pressured to do something before
you are clear about what is needed. Pause and
take a few slow breaths. Consider who else
might help you feel calmer, and remind yourself
of the first aid priorities (opposite). If you still
feel overwhelmed, take another breath and tell
yourself to be calmer. When you are calm, you
will be better able to think more clearly and plan
your response.
The thoughts you have are linked to the
way you behave and the way you feel. If you
think that you cannot cope, you will have
more trouble determining what to do and
will feel more anxious: more ready to fight,
flee, or freeze. If you know how to calm yourself,
you will be better able to deal with anxiety
and help the casualty.
BE CALM
16
When you give first aid, it is important to
protect yourself (and the casualty) from
infection as well as injury. Take steps to avoid
cross-contamination—transmitting germs or
infection to a casualty or contracting infection
from a casualty. Remember, infection is a risk
even with relatively minor injuries. It is a
particular concern if you are treating a wound,
because blood-borne viruses, such as hepatitis B
or C and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV),
may be transmitted by contact with blood. In
practice, the risk is low and should not deter
you from carrying out first aid. The risk
increases if an infected person’s blood makes
contact with yours through a cut or scrape.
Usually, taking measures such as washing
your hands and wearing disposable gloves will
provide sufficient protection for you and the
casualty. There is no known evidence of these
blood-borne viruses being transmitted during
resuscitation. If a face shield or pocket mask
is available, it should be used when you give
rescue breaths (pp.68–69 and pp.78–79).
Take care not to prick yourself with any needle
found on or near a casualty, or cut yourself on
glass. If you accidentally prick or cut your skin,
or splash your eye, wash the area thoroughly
and seek medical help immediately. If you are
providing first aid on a regular basis, it is
advisable to seek guidance on additional
personal protection, such as immunization. If
you think you have been exposed to an infection
while giving first aid, seek medical advice as
soon as possible.
■ Do wash your hands and wear latex-free
disposable gloves (in case you or the casualty
are allergic to latex). If gloves are not available,
ask the casualty to dress his or her own wound,
or enclose your hands in clean plastic bags.
■ Do cover cuts and scrapes on your hands with
waterproof dressings.
■ Do wear a plastic apron if dealing with large
quantities of body fluids, and wear glasses
or goggles to protect your eyes.
■ Do dispose of all waste safely (p.18).
■ Do not touch a wound or any part of
a dressing that will come into contact
with a wound with your bare hands.
■ Do not breathe, cough, or sneeze over a
wound while you are treating a casualty.
BECOMING A FIRST AIDER
PROTECTION FROM INFECTION
WHEN TO SEEK MEDICAL ADVICE
MINIMIZING THE RISK OF CROSSCONTAMINATION
To help protect yourself from infection you can carry
protective equipment such as:
CAUTION
 ■ Pocket mask or face shield
 ■ Latex-free disposable gloves
 ■ Alcohol gel to clean your hands
17
PROTECTION FROM INFECTION
HOW TO WASH YOUR HANDS
Wet your hands under
running water. Put some
soap into the palm of a cupped
hand. Rub the palms of your
hands together.
Rub the back of the fingers
of your right hand against
the palm of your left hand,
then repeat with your left
hand in your right palm.
Rub the palm of your left
hand against the back of
your right hand, then rub the
right palm on the back of your
left hand.
Rub your right thumb in
the palm of your left hand,
then your left thumb in the
right palm.
Interlock the fingers of both
hands and work the soap
between them.
Rub the fingertips of your
left hand in the palm of your
right hand and vice versa. Rinse
thoroughly, then pat dry with a
disposable paper towel.
1
4
2
5
3
6
If you can, wash your hands before you touch
a casualty, but if this is not possible, wash them
as soon as possible afterward. For a thorough
wash, pay attention to all parts of the hands—
palms, wrists, fingers and thumbs, and
fingernails. Use soap and water if available,
or rub your hands with alcohol gel.
THOROUGH HAND-WASHING
»
18
BECOMING A FIRST AIDER
In addition to hand washing, gloves give added
protection against infection in a first aid situation.
If possible, carry protective, disposable, latex-free
gloves with you at all times. Wear them whenever
there is a likelihood of contact with blood or
other body fluids. If in doubt, wear them anyway.
Disposable gloves should be used to treat
only one casualty. Put them on just before you
approach a casualty and remove them as soon
as the treatment is completed and before you
do anything else.
When taking off the gloves, hold the top edge of
one glove with your other gloved hand and peel it
off so that it is inside out. Repeat with the other
hand without touching the outside of the gloves.
Dispose of them in a biohazard bag (below).
Ideally, wash your
hands before
putting on the gloves.
Hold one glove by the
top and pull it on. Do
not touch the main
part of the glove with
your fingers.
Pick up the
second glove with
the gloved hand. With
your fingers under the
top edge, pull it onto
your hand. Your gloved
fingers should not
touch your skin.
Always use latex-free gloves. Some people
have a serious allergy to latex, and this may cause
anaphylactic shock (p.223). Nitrile gloves (often blue
or purple) are recommended.
USING PROTECTIVE GLOVES
DEALING WITH WASTE
Once you have treated a casualty, all soiled
material must be disposed of carefully to
prevent the spread of infection.
Place items such as dressings or gloves in a
plastic bag—ideally a biohazard bag—and give it
to the emergency services. Seal the bag tightly
and label it to show that it contains clinical
waste. Put sharp objects, including needles, in a
plastic container known as a sharps container,
which is usually red. If no sharps container is
available, put used needles in a jar with a screw
top and give it to the EMT for disposal.
BIOHAZARD BAG SHARPS CONTAINER
1 2
PUTTING ON GLOVES
«PROTECTION FROM INFECTION
CAUTION
19
PROTECTION FROM INFECTION | DEALING WITH A CASUALTY
DEALING WITH A CASUALTY
Casualties are often frightened because of
what is happening to them, and what may
happen next. Your role is to stay calm and take
charge of the situation—but be ready to stand
back if there is someone better qualified. If there
is more than one casualty, use the primary survey
(pp.44–45) to identify the most seriously injured
casualties and treat in the order of priority.
Consider the age and appearance of your
casualty when you talk to him, since different
people need different responses. Respect
people’s wishes; accept that someone might
want to be treated in a particular way.
Communication can be difficult if a person
speaks a different language or cannot hear
you. Use simple language or signs or write
questions down. Ask if anyone speaks the
same language as the casualty or knows the
person or saw the incident and can describe
what happened.
BUILDING TRUST
DIVERSITY AND COMMUNICATION
Establish trust with your casualty by
introducing yourself. Find out what the person
likes to be called, and use his name when you
talk to him. Crouch or kneel down so that you
are at the same height as the casualty. Explain
what is happening and why. You will inspire
trust if you say what you are doing before you
do it. Treat the casualty with dignity and respect
at all times. If possible, give him choices, for
example, whether he would prefer to sit or lie
down and/or who he would like to have with
him. Also, if possible, gain his consent before
you treat him by asking if he agrees with
whatever you are going to do.
Reassure the casualty
When treating a casualty, remain calm and do
not do anything without explanation. Try to
answer any questions he may have honestly.
»
SPECIAL CASE TREATING CHILDREN
You will need to use simpler, shorter
words when talking to children.
If possible, make sure a child’s
parents or caregivers are with him,
and keep them involved at all times.
It is important to establish the
caregiver’s trust as well as the child’s.
Talk first to the parent/caregiver and
get his or her permission to continue
to treat the child. Once the parent/
caregiver trusts you, the child will
also feel more confident.
20
BECOMING A FIRST AIDER
DEALING WITH A CASUALTY
Use your eyes and ears to be aware of how a
casualty responds. Listen by showing verbal and
nonverbal listening skills.
 ■ Make eye contact, but look away now
and then so as not to stare.
 ■ Use a calm, confident voice that is loud
enough to be heard but do not shout.
 ■ Do not speak too quickly.
 ■ Keep instructions simple: use short
sentences and simple words.
 ■ Use affirming nods and “mmms” to show you
are listening when the casualty speaks.
 ■ Check that the casualty understands what
you mean—ask to make sure.
 ■ Use simple hand gestures and movements.
 ■ Do not interrupt the casualty, but always
acknowledge what you are told; for example,
summarize what a casualty has told you to
show that you understand.
WHEN A CASUALTY RESISTS HELP
TREATING THE CASUALTY
LISTEN CAREFULLY
If someone is ill or injured he may be upset,
confused, tearful, angry, and/or anxious to get
away. Be sensitive to a casualty’s feelings; let
him know that his reactions are understandable.
Also accept that you may not be able to help,
or might even be seen as a threat. Stay at a safe
distance until you have gained the person’s
consent to move closer, so that he does not feel
crowded. Do not argue or disagree. A casualty
may refuse help, for example because he is
suffering from a head injury or hypothermia. If
you think a person needs something other than
what he asks for, explain why. For example, you
could say, “I think someone should look at
where you’re hurt before you move, in case
moving makes it worse.” If someone still refuses
your help and you think he needs urgent
medical attention, call 911 for emergency help.
A casualty has the right to refuse help, even if
it causes further harm. Tell the dispatcher
that you have offered first aid and have been
refused. If you are worried that a person’s
condition is deteriorating, observe from a
distance until help arrives.
When treating a casualty, always relate to him
calmly and thoughtfully to maintain trust.
Think about how he might be feeling.
Check that you have understood what the
casualty said and consider the impact of
your actions, for example, is the casualty
becoming more (or less) upset, angry, and
tense? A change in emotional state can
indicate that a condition is worsening.
Be prepared to change your manner,
depending on what a person feels comfortable
with; for example, ask fewer questions or talk
about something else. Keep a casualty updated
and give him options rather than telling him
what to do. Ask the casualty about his next-ofkin or friends who can help, and help him make
contact with them. Ask if you can help make
arrangements so that any responsibilities the
casualty may have can be taken care of.
Stay with the casualty. Do not leave someone
who may be dying, seriously ill, or badly injured
alone except to go to call for emergency help.
Talk to the casualty while touching his shoulder
or arm, or holding a hand. Never allow a
casualty to feel alone.
«
21
DEALING WITH A CASUALTY
In an emergency situation you may be faced
with several tasks at once: to maintain safety, to
call for help, and to start giving first aid. Some
of the people at the scene may be able to help
you do the following:
 ■ Make the area safe; for example, control
traffic and keep onlookers away.
 ■ Call 911 for emergency help (p.23).
 ■ Obtain first aid equipment, for example
an AED (automated external defibrillator).
 ■ Control bleeding with direct pressure, or
support an injured limb.
 ■ Help maintain the casualty’s privacy by
holding a blanket around the scene and
encouraging onlookers to move away.
 ■ Transport the casualty to a safe place if
his life is in immediate danger, only if it
is safer to move him than to leave him where
he is, and you have the necessary help and
equipment (p.234).
The reactions of bystanders may cause you
concern or anger. They may have had no first
aid training and feel helpless or frightened
themselves. If they have seen or been involved
in the incident, they too may be injured and
distressed. Bear this in mind if you need to ask
a bystander to help you. Talk to people in a
firm but gentle manner. By staying calm
yourself, you will gain their trust and help
them remain calm too.
ENLISTING HELP FROM OTHERS
CARE OF PERSONAL BELONGINGS
KEEPING NOTES
Make sure the casualty’s belongings are with
him at all times. If you have to search
belongings for identification or clues to a
person’s condition (medication, for example),
do so in front of a reliable witness. If possible,
ask the casualty’s permission before you do
this. Afterward, ensure that all of the clothing
and personal belongings and medication
accompany the casualty to the hospital or are
handed over to the police.
As you gather information about a casualty,
write it down so that you can refer to it later.
A written record of the timing of events is
particularly valuable to medical personnel.
Note, for example, the length of a period of
unconsciousness, the duration of a seizure,
the time of any changes in the casualty’s
condition, and the time of any intervention
or treatment. Hand your notes to the
emergency services when they arrive, or give
them to the casualty. Useful information to
provide includes:
 ■ Casualty’s details, including his name, age
and contact details
 ■ History of the incident or illness
 ■ Brief description of any injuries
 ■ Unusual behavior, or a change in behavior
 ■ Treatment—where given and when
 ■ Vital signs—level of response, breathing
rate, and pulse (pp.52–53), if the first aider
is trained
 ■ Medical history
 ■ Medication the casualty has taken, with
details of the amounts taken and when
 ■ Next-of-kin contact details
 ■ Your contact details as well as the date,
time, and place of your involvement
Remember that any information you gather
is confidential. Never share it with anyone
not involved in the casualty’s care without his
agreement. Let the casualty know why you are
recording information and who you will give
it to. When you are asking for such information,
be sensitive to who is around and of the
casualty’s privacy and dignity.
22
BECOMING A FIRST AIDER
REQUESTING HELP
Further help is available from a range of
sources. If help is needed, you must decide both
on the type of help and how to access it. First,
carry out a primary survey (pp.44–45) to
ascertain the severity of the casualty’s
condition. If it is not serious, explain the options
and allow him to choose where to go. If a
casualty’s condition is serious, seek emergency
help. Throughout the book there are guidelines
for choosing the appropriate level of help.
 ■ Call 911 for emergency help if the casualty
needs urgent medical attention and should be
transported to the hospital in an ambulance,
for example, when you suspect a heart attack.
 ■ Take or send the casualty to a hospital.
Choose this option when a casualty needs
hospital treatment, but his condition is
unlikely to worsen; for example, with a finger
injury. You can take him yourself if you can
arrange transportation—either in your own
car or in a taxi.
 ■ Seek medical advice. Depending on what is
available in his area, the casualty should be
advised to call his own physician or nurse
practitioner. He would do this, for example,
when he has symptoms such as earache
or diarrhea.
You can call for help from:
 ■ Emergency services, including police, fire
and ambulance services, by calling 911
 ■ Utilities, including gas, electricity or
water—the phone number will be in the
telephone directory
 ■ Health services, including doctor, dentist,
and hospital—this varies in different
areas. The phone numbers will be in the
telephone directory
Calls to the emergency services are free
from any phone, including cell phones. On
some roadways, emergency phones have been
placed at regular intervals to enable people to
call for help. To summon help using these
telephones, pick up the receiver and your call
will be answered. However, the density of these
phones can vary widely by state and area. You
may do better with a cell phone than these
highway phones.
Keep time away from the casualty to a
minimum. Ideally, tell someone else to make
the call for you while you stay with the casualty.
Ask the person to confirm that the call has
been made and that help is on the way. If you
have to leave a casualty to call for help, first
take any necessary vital action (primary survey
pp.44–45).
CALLING FOR HELP
Calling for help
When calling for help in an
emergency, stay calm. Be
clear and concise and give
as much detail as possible.
23
REQUESTING HELP
When you dial 911, you will be asked which
service you require. If there are casualties, ask
for the ambulance service (EMS); the dispatcher
will alert other services if they are required.
Always remain on the telephone and let the
dispatcher hang up first, because you may be
given important information about what to do
for the casualty while you wait, and/or asked for
further information as the situation develops. If
someone else makes the call, make sure that he
is aware of the importance of his call and that
he reports back to you after making the call.
TALKING TO THE EMERGENCY
SERVICES
State your name clearly and say that you are
acting in your capacity as a first aider. It is
essential to provide the following:
 ■ Your telephone number and/or the number
you are calling from.
 ■ The exact location of the incident; give
a road name or number. It can also be helpful
to mention any intersections or other
landmarks in the area. In many cases your call
can be traced if you are unsure of your exact
location. If you are on a highway, say in which
direction the vehicles were traveling.
 ■ The type and gravity of the emergency. For
example, “Traffic accident, two cars, road
blocked, three people trapped.”
 ■ Number, gender, and age of casualties. For
example, “One man, early sixties, breathing
difficulties, suspected heart attack.”
 ■ Details of any hazards, such as gas, toxic
substances, power-line damage, or adverse
weather conditions, such as fog or ice.
Once the emergency services arrive, they
will take over the care of the casualty. Tell
them what has happened and any treatment
given. Hand over any notes you made while
attending the casualty. You may be asked to
continue helping, for example, by assisting
relatives or friends of the casualty while the
paramedics provide emergency care.
You should also follow instructions given
to you by the medical team. Remain until
you are told you can go, since they may need
to ask you more questions or the police may
want to speak to you. Help maintain a clear
and clean environment and preserve the
dignity and confidentiality of those involved.
You may be asked to contact a relative.
Explain as simply and honestly as you can
what has happenened and where the casualty
has been taken. Do not be vague or exaggerate
because this may cause unnecessary alarm.
It is better to admit ignorance than to
give someone misleading information.
MAKING THE CALL
WHEN THE EMERGENCY SERVICES ARRIVE
Assisting at the scene
Once the emergency services arrive, tell them everything
you know. While they assess and treat the casualty, you
may be asked to look after or reassure friends.
However, the information you give may cause
distress; if so, remain calm and be clear about
what to do next.
24
BECOMING A FIRST AIDER
THE USE OF MEDICATION
REMEMBER YOUR OWN NEEDS
In first aid, administering medication is largely
confined to relieving general aches and pains.
It usually involves helping a casualty take his
own medicines.
A variety of medications can be bought
without a doctor’s prescription. However,
you must not buy or borrow medication
to administer to a casualty, or give your own.
If you advise the casualty to take any
medication other than that stipulated in this
manual, he may be put at risk and you could
face legal action as a consequence. Whenever a
casualty takes medication, it is essential to
make sure that:
 ■ It is for the condition
 ■ It is not out of date
 ■ It is taken as advised
 ■ Any precautions are strictly followed
 ■ The recommended dose is not exceeded
 ■ You keep a record of the name and dose of
the medication as well as the time and
method of administration
Most people who learn first aid gain
significantly from doing so. In addition to
learning new skills and meeting new people, by
learning first aid you can make a real difference
in peoples’ lives. Being able to help people who
are ill or injured often results in a range of
positive feelings. However, you may also feel
stressed when you are called upon to administer
first aid, and feel emotional once you have
finished treating a casualty, whatever the
outcome. Occasionally, that stress can interfere
with your physical and mental well-being after
an incident. Everyone responds to stressful
situations in different ways, and some people
are more susceptible to stress than others. It is
important to learn how to deal with any stress
in order to maintain your own health and
effectiveness as a first aider. Gaining an
understanding of your own needs can help you
be better prepared for future situations.
An emergency is an emotional experience.
Many first aiders experience satisfaction, or
even elation, and most cope well. However,
after you have treated a casualty, depending on
the type of incident and the outcome, you
might experience a mixture of the following:
 ■ Satisfaction
 ■ Confusion, worry, doubt
 ■ Anger, sadness, fear
You may go through what has happened again
and again in your mind, so it can be helpful to
talk to someone you trust about how you feel
and what you did. Consider talking to someone
else who was there, or who you know has had a
similar experience. Never reproach yourself or
hide your feelings. This is especially important if
the outcome was not as you had hoped. Even
with appropriate treatment, and however hard
you try, a casualty may not recover.
IMMEDIATELY AFTER AN INCIDENT
Aspirin should never be given to anyone under the
age of 16 years because there is risk of a rare
condition called Reye’s syndrome.
CAUTION
25
THE USE OF MEDICATION | REMEMBER YOUR OWN NEEDS
Delivering first aid can lead to positive feelings
because you notice new things about yourself,
such as your ability to deal with a crisis.
However, occasionally, the effect of an incident
on you will depend on your first aid experience
as well as on the nature of the actual incident.
The majority of the incidents you will deal with
will be of a minor nature and they will probably
involve people you know. If you have witnessed
an incident that involved a threat to life or you
have experienced a feeling of helplessness, you
may find yourself suffering from feelings of stress
after the incident. In most cases, these feelings
will disappear over time.
If, however, you experience persistent or distressing
symptoms associated with a stressful incident, such
as nightmares and flashbacks, seek further help
from someone you trust and feel you can confide in.
See your doctor or a mental health professional
if you feel overwhelmed by your symptoms. You
can talk through them with the professionals and
together decide what is best for you. Seeking help
is nothing to be embarrassed about, and it is
important to overcome these feelings. This will
not only help you deal with your current
reactions, but it will also help you learn how to
respond to situations in the future.
LATER REACTIONS
Talking things over
Confiding in a friend or relative is often useful. Ideally,
talk to someone who was also present at the incident;
she may have the same feelings about it as you. If you
are unable to deal with the effects of the event you
were part of or witnessed, seek help from your doctor.
WHEN TO SEEK HELP
The scene of any incident can present
many potential dangers, whether
someone has become ill or has been injured,
whether in the home or outside at the scene
of an incident. Before any first aid is provided
you must make sure that approaching the
scene of the incident does not present
unacceptable danger to the casualty, or to you
or anyone else who is helping.
This chapter provides advice for first
aiders on how to ensure safety in an
emergency situation. There are specific
guidelines for emergencies that pose a
particular risk. These include fires, traffic
accidents, and incidents involving electricity
and drowning.
The procedures that are used by the
emergency services for major incidents,
where particular precautions are necessary
and where first aiders may be called on to
help, are also described here.
 ■ To protect yourself from danger and make the
area safe.
 ■ To assess the situation quickly and calmly and
summon help if necessary.
 ■ To assist any casualties and provide necessary
treatment with the help of bystanders.
 ■ To call 911 for emergency help if you suspect serious
injury or illness.
 ■ To be aware of your own needs.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
2
MANAGING
AN INCIDENT
28
MANAGING AN INCIDENT
ACTION AT AN EMERGENCY
In any emergency it is important that you
follow a clear plan of action. This will enable
you to prioritize the demands that may be
made upon you, and help you decide on your
best response.
The principle steps are: to assess the situation,
to make the area safe (if possible), and to give
first aid. Use the primary survey (pp.44–45) to
identify the most seriously injured casualties
and treat them in the order of priority.
Evaluating the scene accurately is one of the
most important factors in the management of an
incident. You should stay calm. State that you
have first aid training and, if there are no medical
personnel in attendance, calmly take charge.
Identify any safety risks and assess the
resources available. Action for key dangers you
may face, such as fire, are dealt with in this
chapter, but be aware, too, of tripping hazards,
sharp objects, chemical spills, and falling debris.
All incidents should be managed in a similar
manner. Consider the following:
 ■ Safety What are the dangers and do they still
exist? Are you wearing protective equipment?
Is it safe for you to approach?
 ■ Scene What factors are involved at the
incident? What are the mechanisms of the
injuries (pp.42–43)? How many casualties are
there? What are the potential injuries?
 ■ Situation What happened? How many people
are involved and what ages are they? Are any
of them children or elderly?
The conditions that give rise to an incident
may still present a danger and must be
eliminated if possible. It may be that a simple
measure, such as turning off the ignition of
a car to reduce the risk of fire, is sufficient.
As a last resort, move the casualty to safety.
Usually specialist help and equipment is
required for this.
When approaching a casualty, make sure
you protect yourself: wear high-visibility
clothing, gloves, and head protection if you
have them. Remember, too, that a casualty
faces the risk of injury from the same hazards
that you face. If extrication from the scene is
delayed, try to protect the casualty from any
additional hazards.
If you cannot make an area safe, call 911 for
emergency help before performing first aid.
Stand clear until the emergency services have
secured the scene.
Once an area has been made safe, use the
primary survey (pp.44–45) to quickly carry out
an initial assessment of the casualty or
casualties to establish treatment priorities. If
there is more than one casualty, attend to those
with life-threatening conditions first. If possible,
treat casualties in the position in which you find
them; move them only if they are in immediate
danger or if it is necessary in order to provide
life-saving treatment. Enlist help from others if
ASSESSING THE SITUATION
MAKING AN AREA SAFE
GIVING EMERGENCY HELP
29
ACTION AT AN EMERGENCY
Hand over any notes you have made to the
emergency services when they arrive (p.21).
Answer any questions they may have and follow
any instructions. As a first aider you may be
asked to help, for example, to move a casualty
using specialist equipment. If so, you should
always follow their instructions.
HELICOPTER RESCUE
Occasionally, helicopter rescue is required.
If a casualty is being rescued in this way, there
are a number of safety rules to follow. If the
emergency services are already present,
you should stay clear unless they give you
specific instructions.
If the emergency services are not present,
keep bystanders clear. Make sure everyone
is at least 50 yards (45 meters) away, and
that no one is smoking. Kneel down as the
helicopter approaches, keeping well away
from the rotor blades. Once it has landed,
do not approach it. Keep bystanders back
and wait for a member of the crew to
approach you.
ASSISTING THE EMERGENCY SERVICES
Begin treatment
Start life-saving
first aid as soon as
possible. Ask others to
call for help and retrieve
equipment such as an
AED (automated external
defibrillator).
possible. Ask bystanders to call for the
emergency services (p.23). They can also help
protect a casualty’s privacy, put out flares or
warning triangles in the event of a vehicle
accident (p.30), or retrieve equipment while you
begin first aid.
30
MANAGING AN INCIDENT
TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
The severity of traffic accidents can range
from a fall from a bicycle to a major vehicle
crash involving many casualties. Often, the
accident site will present serious risks to
safety, largely because of passing traffic.
It is essential to make the accident area safe
before attending any casualties (p.28); this
protects you, the casualties, and other road
users. Once the area is safe, quickly assess the
casualties and prioritize treatment. Give first aid
to those with life-threatening injuries before
treating anyone else. Call 911 for emergency
help, giving as much detail as you can about the
accident, indicating number and age of the
casualties, and types of injury.
Do not put yourself or others in further danger.
Take the following precautions:
 ■ Park safely, well away from the site of the
accident, set your hazard lights flashing,
and put on a high-visibility jacket/vest if
you have one.
 ■ Set up warning triangles or flares (or position
another vehicle that has hazard lights) at
least 50 yards (45 meters) from the accident
in each direction; bystanders can do this
while you attend to the casualty. If possible,
send helpers to warn oncoming drivers to
slow down.
 ■ Make vehicles safe. For example, switch off
the ignition of any damaged vehicle. Stabilize
vehicles. If a vehicle is upright, and you can
get in without risk to yourself, apply the
emergency brake, put it in park, or place
blocks in front of the wheels. If it is on its side,
do not attempt to right it.
 ■ Watch out for physical dangers, such as
traffic. Make sure that no one smokes
anywhere near the accident.
 ■ Alert the emergency services to damaged
power lines, fuel spills, or any vehicles with
HAZMAT signs (opposite).
MAKING THE ACCIDENT AREA SAFE
Warn other road users
Ask a bystander to set up
warning triangles in both
directions. Advise the
person to watch for other
vehicles while she is
doing this.
31
TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
Quickly assess any casualties by carrying out
a primary survey (pp.44–45). Deal first with
those who have life-threatening injuries.
Assume that any casualty who has been
involved in a traffic accident may have a neck
or spinal injury (pp.157–59). If possible, treat
casualties in the position in which you find
them, supporting the head and neck at all times,
and wait for the emergency services.
Search the area around the accident thoroughly
to make sure you do not overlook any casualty
who may have been thrown clear, or who
has wandered away from the site. Bystanders
can help. If a person is trapped in or under a
vehicle, she will need to be released by the fire
department. Monitor and record the casualty’s
vital signs—level of response, breathing, and
pulse (pp.52–53) if trained—while you wait.
ASSESSING THE CASUALTIES
Casualty in a vehicle
Assume that any injured casualty in a vehicle has a
neck injury. Support the head while you await help.
Reassure her and keep her ears uncovered so that
she can hear you.
 ■ Do not cross a highway to attend to an accident
or casualty.
 ■ At night, wear or carry something light or reflective,
such as a high-visibility jacket, and use a flashlight.
 ■ Do not move the casualty unless it is absolutely
necessary. If you do have to move her, the method
will depend on the casualty’s condition and
available help.
 ■ Be aware that road surfaces may be slippery because
of fuel, oil, or even ice.
 ■ Be aware that undeployed air bags and unactivated
seat-belt tensioners may be a hazard.
 ■ Find out as much as you can about the accident and
relay this information to the emergency services
when they arrive.
Traffic accidents may be complicated by spillages of
toxic substances or vapors. Keep bystanders away
from the scene and stand upwind of the vehicle.
HAZMAT signs on the back of the vehicle indicate
that it may be carrying a dangerous substance. Stay
clear and give the details to the emergency services.
CAUTION
SPECIAL CASE HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
 GASES
 RADIOACTIVE
 MATERIALS
 OXIDIZERS/ORGANIC
 PEROXIDES
 DANGEROUS
 GOODS
 TOXIC
 MATERIALS
 CORROSIVE
 MATERIALS
 FLAMMABLE
 LIQUIDS
 FLAMMABLE
 SOLIDS
 EXPLOSIVES
32
MANAGING AN INCIDENT
FIRES
Fire spreads very quickly, so your first priority
is to warn any people at risk. If in a building,
activate the nearest fire alarm, call 911 for
emergency help, then leave the building.
However, if doing this delays your escape,
make the call when you are out of the
building. As a first aider, try to keep everyone
calm. Encourage and assist people to evacuate
the area.
When arriving at an incident involving fire,
stop, observe, think: do not enter the area.
A minor fire can escalate in minutes to a serious
blaze. Call 911 for emergency help and wait for
it to arrive.
A fire needs three components to start
and maintain it: ignition (a spark or flame); a
source of fuel (gasoline, wood, or fabric); and
oxygen (air). Removing one of these elements
can break this “triangle of fire.”
 ■ Remove combustible materials, such as
paper or cardboard, from the path of a fire,
because they can fuel the flames.
 ■ Cut off a fire’s oxygen supply by shutting
a door on a fire or smothering the flames
with a fire blanket. This will cause the fire to
suffocate and go out.
 ■ Turn off a car’s ignition, or switch off the
gasoline supply.
If you see or suspect a fire in a building,
activate the first fire alarm you see. Try
to help people out of the building without
putting yourself at risk. Close doors behind
you to help prevent the fire from spreading.
If you are in a public building, use the fire
exits and look for assembly points outside.
You should already know the evacuation
procedure at your workplace. If, however,
you are visiting other premises you are
not familiar with, follow the signs for escape
routes and obey any instructions given by
the fire marshals.
THE ELEMENTS OF FIRE
LEAVING A BURNING BUILDING
When escaping from a fire:
 ■ Do not reenter a burning building to collect personal
possessions
 ■ Do not use elevators
 ■ Do not go back to a building unless cleared to
do so by a fire officer
Fire precautions:
 ■ Do not move anything that is on fire
 ■ Do not smother flames with flammable materials
 ■ Do not fight a fire if it could endanger your own safety
 ■ If your clothes catch fire and help is not available, you
can extinguish the flames yourself by stopping,
dropping to the ground, and rolling
 ■ Do not put water on an electrical fire: pull the plug
out or switch the power off
 ■ Smother a grease fire with a fire blanket or pot lid;
never use water
Evacuating other
people
Encourage people
to leave the building
calmly but quickly
via the nearest exit.
If they have to use the
stairs, make sure they
do not rush and risk
falling down.
CAUTION
33
FIRES
Always follow this procedure: Stop, Drop,
and Roll.
 ■ Stop the casualty from panicking, running
around, or going outside; any movement
or breeze will fan the flames.
 ■ Drop the casualty to the ground. If possible,
wrap him tightly in a fire blanket, or heavy
fabric such as a coat, curtain, blanket (not
a nylon blanket or an openweave type of
any material—acrylic, wool, cotton, or
other), or rug.
 ■ Roll the casualty along the ground until the
flames have been smothered. Treat any
burns (pp.174–80): help the casualty lie down
with the burned side uppermost, and cool the
burn by applying cool water or fanning the
area gently.
Any fire in a confined space creates a highly
dangerous atmosphere that is low in oxygen
and may also be polluted by carbon monoxide
and other toxic fumes. Never enter a smoke- or
fume-filled building or open a door leading to a
fire. Let the emergency services do this.
 ■ If you are trapped in a burning building, if
possible go into a room at the front of the
building with a window and shut the door.
Block gaps under the door by placing a rug or
similar heavy fabric across the bottom of the
door to minimize smoke. Open the window
and shout for help.
 ■ Stay low if you have to cross a smoke-filled
room: air is clearest at floor level.
 ■ If escaping through a high window, climb out
backward feet first and lower yourself to the
full length of your arms before dropping down.
CLOTHING ON FIRE
SMOKE AND FUMES
Putting out flames
Help the casualty onto the ground to stop flames from
rising to his face. Wrap him in a fire blanket to starve
flames of oxygen, and roll him on the ground until the
flames are extinguished.
Avoiding smoke and fumes
Shut the door of the room you are in and put a rug or
blanket against the door to keep smoke out. Open the
window and shout for help. Keep as low as possible to
avoid fumes in the room.
34
MANAGING AN INCIDENT
ELECTRICAL INCIDENTS
When a person is electrocuted, the passage
of electrical current through the body may
stun him, causing his breathing and heartbeat
to stop. The electrical current can also cause
burns both where it enters and where it exits
the body to go to “earth.” An electrical burn
may appear very small or not be visible on
the skin, but the damage can extend deep into
the tissues (p.178).
Factors that affect the severity of the injury
are: the voltage; the type of current; and the
path of the current. A low voltage of 110–120
volts is found in most outlets of a home or
workplace, but large appliances require 220–
240-volt outlets. Industrial outlets may be
up to 440 volts. The type of current will either
be alternating (AC) or direct (DC), and the
path of the current can be hand-to-hand,
hand-to-foot, or foot-to-foot.
Most low-voltage and high-tension currents
are AC, which causes muscular spasms (tetany)
and the “locked-on” phenomenon—the
casualty’s grasp is “locked” onto the object,
preventing him from letting go, so he may
remain electrically charged (“live”). In contrast,
DC tends to produce a single large muscular
contraction that often throws the person
away from the source. Be aware that the jolt
may cause the casualty to be thrown or to fall,
resulting in injuries such as spinal injuries
and fractures.
Contact with a high-voltage current found
in power lines and overhead cables, is usually
immediately fatal. Anyone who survives will
have severe burns since the temperature of the
electricity may reach up to 9,000°F (5,000°C).
Furthermore, the shock produces a muscular
spasm that propels the casualty some distance,
causing additional injuries.
High-voltage electricity may jump (“arc”)
up to 20 yards (18 m). The power must be
cut off and isolated before the casualty is
approached. A casualty who has suffered this
type of shock is likely to be unconscious. Once
you have been officially informed that it is safe
to approach, assess the casualty, and if he is not
breathing, begin CPR with chest compressions
(pp.54–87).
HIGH-VOLTAGE CURRENT
Protect bystanders
Keep everyone away from the incident. Bystanders
should stay at least 20 yards (18 m) from the damaged
cable and/or casualty.
 ■ Do not touch the casualty if he is in contact with the
electrical current.
 ■ Do not use anything metallic to break the electrical
contact.
 ■ Do not approach high-voltage wires until the power
is turned off.
 ■ Do not move a person with an electrical injury unless
he is in immediate danger and is no longer in contact
with the electricity.
 ■ If it is safe to touch the casualty and he is
unconscious and not breathing, start CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
CAUTION
35
ELECTRICAL INCIDENTS
Domestic current, as used in homes and
workplaces, can cause serious injury or even
death. Incidents are usually due to faulty
switches, frayed cords, or defective appliances.
Young children are at risk because they are
naturally curious, and may put their fingers or
other objects into electrical wall sockets.
Water is also a very efficient conductor of
electricity, so presents additional risks.
Handling an otherwise safe electrical appliance
with wet hands, or when you are standing on
a wet floor, greatly increases the risk of
an electric shock.
A natural burst of electricity discharged
from the atmosphere, lightning forms an
intense trail of light and heat. Lightning
seeks contact with the ground through the
nearest tall feature in the landscape and,
sometimes, through anyone standing
nearby. However, the short duration of a
lightning strike usually precludes serious
thermal injury. It may, however, set clothing
on fire, knock the casualty down, or cause
heart and breathing to stop (cardiac arrest,
p.57). Cardiopulmonary resuscitation/CPR
(adult, pp.66–71; child, pp.76–79; infant, pp.82–
83) must be started promptly. Always clear
everyone from the site of a lightning strike
since it can strike again in the same place.
LOW-VOLTAGE CURRENT
LIGHTNING
BREAKING CONTACT WITH THE ELECTRICITY
Before beginning any treatment, look first,
do not touch. If the casualty is still in contact
with the electrical source, he will be “live” and
you risk electrocution.
Once you are sure that the power is off
and contact between the casualty and the
electricity has been broken, perform a primary
survey (pp.44–45) and treat any condition found.
Call 911 for emergency help.
Turn off the source of electricity, to break the
contact between the casualty and the electrical
supply. Switch off the current at the circuit box if
possible. Otherwise, turn off the electricity at the
wall switch, if there is one.
After the power is turned off, move the source
away from both you and the casualty.
2
4
1
3
36
Incidents around water may involve people of
any age. However, drowning is one of the most
common causes of accidental death among young
people under the age of 16. Young children can
drown in fish ponds, paddling pools, bathtubs,
and even in buckets or the toilet if they fall in
head first, as well as in swimming pools, in the
sea, and in open water. Many cases of drowning
involve people who have been swimming in
strong currents or very cold water, or who have
been swimming or boating after drinking alcohol.
There are particular dangers connected with
incidents involving swimmers in cold water. The
sudden immersion in cold water can result in an
overstimulation of nerves, causing the heart to
stop (cardiac arrest). Cold water may cause
hypothermia (pp.186–87) and exacerbate shock
(pp.112–13). Spasm in the throat and inhalation
of water can block the airway (hypoxia, p.92, and
drowning, p.100). Inhaled or swallowed water
may be absorbed into the circulatory system,
causing water overload to the brain, heart, or
lungs. The exertion of swimming can also strain
the heart. Such incidents may happen in the
winter, if someone falls through the ice when
skating on a pond or pursuing a pet.
MANAGING AN INCIDENT
WATER INCIDENTS
 ■ If the casualty is unconscious, lift him out of the
water, support his head and neck, and carry him, his
head lower than his chest to keep him from inhaling
water and protect the airway if he vomits.
 ■ If removal from the water cannot be immediate,
begin rescue breaths while still in the water.
 ■ When you reach land, check for normal breathing
and, if not, begin CPR with compressions (pp.54–87).
WATER RESCUE
Your first priority is to get the casualty onto
dry land with the minimum of danger to
yourself. Stay on dry land, hold out a stick, a branch
or a rope for him to grab, then pull him from the
water. Alternatively, throw him a float.
If you are a trained lifesaver, there is no
danger to yourself, and the casualty is
unconscious, wade or swim to the casualty and tow
him ashore. If you cannot do this safely, call 911 for
emergency help.
Once the casualty is out of the water, shield
him from the wind, if possible. Treat him for
drowning (p.100) and the effects of severe cold
(pp.186–88). If possible, replace any wet clothing
with dry clothing.
Arrange to take or send the casualty to the
hospital, even if he seems to have recovered
completely. If you are at all concerned, call 911 for
emergency help.
2
1
3
4
CAUTION
37
WATER INCIDENTS | MAJOR INCIDENTS/MASS CASUALTIES
MAJOR INCIDENT/MASS CASUALTIES
A major incident, or mass casualty incident,
is one that presents a serious threat to the
safety of a community, or may cause so many
casualties that it requires special arrangements
from the emergency services. Events of this
kind can overwhelm the resources of the
emergency services because there may
be more casualties to treat than there are
personnel available.
It is the responsibility of the emergency
services to declare a situation to be a mass
casualty, and certain procedures will be
activated by them if necessary. The area around
the incident will be sealed off and hospitals and
emergency response personnel notified.
Organizing this is not a first aider’s
responsibility, but you may be asked to help.
If you are the first person on the scene
of what may be a mass casualty, do not
approach it. Call 911 for emergency help
immediately (pp.22–23). The dispatcher will
need to know the type of incident that has
occurred (for example, a fire, a traffic accident,
or an explosion), the location, the access, any
particular hazards and the approximate number
of casualties.
First, the area immediately around the
incident will be cordoned off—the inner
perimeter. Around this an outer perimeter,
the minimum safe area for emergency
personnel (fire, ambulance and police), will
be established. No one without the correct
identification and safety equipment will
be allowed inside the area. The on-scene
commander, typically the fire chief, will
lead the response. Triage of casualties will
occur and if the scene is safe and conditions
permit, casualties in need of medical
treatment will be moved to a casualty
collection point.
TRIAGE
The emergency services use a system called
triage to assess casualties. All casualties
undergo a primary survey (pp.44–45) at the
scene to establish treatment priorities. This will
be followed by a secondary survey (pp.46–48) in
the casualty collection point. This check will be
repeated and any change monitored until a
casualty recovers or is transferred into the care
of a medical team.
 ■ Casualties who cannot walk will undergo
further assessment. They will be assigned to
Red / Priority One (immediate) or Yellow /
Priority Two (urgent) areas for treatment, and
transferred to a hospital by ambulance as
soon as possible.
 ■ Walking casualties with minor injuries will
be assigned to the Green /Priority Three area
for treatment and transferred to a hospital
if necessary.
 ■ Uninjured people may be taken to a survivor
reception center.
 ■ Dead or critically injured casualties will be
assigned to the Gray or Black categories.
FIRST AIDER’S ROLE
You will not be allowed to enter the perimeter
area without adequate personal safety
equipment or approval from emergency
services personnel. You may be asked to assist
the emergency services by, for example,
helping identify casualties that have minor
injuries, supporting injured limbs, making a
note of casualties’ names, and/or helping
contact their relatives.
EMERGENCY SERVICE SCENE ORGANIZATION
When a person suddenly becomes
ill or has been injured, it is
important to find out what is wrong
as quickly as possible. However, your
first priority is to make sure that you
are not endangering yourself by
approaching a casualty.
Once you are sure that an incident
area is safe, you need to begin your
assessment of the casualty or casualties.
This chapter explains how to approach
each casualty and plan your assessment
using a methodical two-stage system,
first to check and treat any life-threatening
conditions according to their priority
(primary survey), then to carry out a
detailed assessment looking for injuries
that are not immediately apparent
(secondary survey). There is advice on
deciding treatment priorities, managing
more than one casualty, and arranging
aftercare. A casualty’s condition may
improve or deteriorate while in your care,
so there is guidance on how to monitor
changes in his condition.
 ■ To assess a situation quickly and calmly,
while first protecting yourself and the
casualty from any danger.
 ■ To assess each casualty and treat
life-threatening injuries first.
 ■ To carry out a more detailed assessment of
each casualty.
 ■ To seek appropriate help. Call 911 for
emergency help if you suspect serious
injury or illness.
 ■ To be aware of your own needs.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
3
ASSESSING A
CASUALTY
40
ASSESSING A CASUALTY
ASSESSING THE SICK OR INJURED
From the previous chapters you now know
that to ensure the best possible outcome for
anyone who is injured or suddenly becomes
ill you need to take responsibility for making
assessments. Tell those at the scene that
you are a trained first aid provider and
calmly take control. However, as indicated in
Chapter 2 (pp.26–37), resist the temptation
to begin dealing with any casualty until you
have the assessed the overall situation,
ensured that everyone involved is safe and,
if appropriate, taken steps to organize the
necessary help. As you read this chapter, look
back at Chapter 1 (pp.12–25) and remember
the following:
 ■ Be calm
 ■ Be aware of risks
 ■ Build and maintain the casualty’s trust
 ■ Call appropriate help
 ■ Remember your own needs
There are three aspects to this:
 ■ First, find out what is wrong with
the casualty
 ■ Second, treat conditions found in
order of severity—life-threatening
conditions first
 ■ Third, arrange for the next step of a
casualty’s care. You will need to decide
what type of care a casualty needs. You
may need to call for emergency help,
suggest the casualty seeks medical
advice, or allow him to go home,
accompanied if you think it is necessary.
Other people at the incident can
help you with this. Ask one of them to
call 911 for emergency help while you
attend a casualty. Alternatively, they
may be able to look after less seriously
injured casualties, or retrieve first
aid equipment.
MANAGING THE INJURED OR SICK
First actions
Support the casualty;
a bystander may
be able to help. Ask the
casualty what happened,
and try to identify the
most serious injury.
41
ASSESSING THE SICK OR INJURED
If there is more than one casualty, you will need to
prioritize those that must be treated first according
to the severity of their injuries. Use the primary
survey ABC principles (above) to do this. Remember
that unresponsive casualties are at greatest risk.
METHODS OF ASSESSMENT
When you assess a casualty you first need to
identify and deal with any life-threatening
conditions or injuries—the primary survey.
Deal with each life-threatening condition as
you find it, working in the following order—
airway, breathing, circulation—before you
progress to the next stage. Depending on
your findings, you may not move on to the
next stage of the assessment. If the lifethreatening injuries are successfully managed,
or there are none, you can continue the
assessment and perform a secondary survey.
THE PRIMARY SURVEY
This is an initial rapid assessment of a casualty
to establish and treat conditions that are an
immediate threat to life (pp.44–45).
If a casualty is conscious, suffering from
minor injuries and is talking to you, then this
survey will be completed very quickly. If,
however, a casualty is more seriously injured
(for example, unconscious), this assessment
will take longer.
Follow the Airway, Breathing, and Circulation
(ABC) principle:
 ■ Airway Is the airway open and clear?
The airway is not open and clear if the
casualty is unable to speak. An obstructed
airway will prevent breathing, causing hypoxia
(p.92) and, ultimately, death.
The airway is open and clear if the casualty is
talking to you.
 ■ Breathing Is the casualty breathing normally?
If the casualty is not breathing normally, call
911 for emergency help, then start chest
compressions with rescue breaths
(cardiopulmonary resuscitation/CPR). If this
happens, you are unlikely to move on to
the next stage. If the casualty is breathing,
check for and treat any breathing difficulty
such as asthma, then move on to the next
stage: circulation.
 ■ Circulation Is the casualty bleeding severely?
If he is bleeding this must be treated
immediately because it can lead to a lifethreatening condition known as shock
(pp.112–13). Call 911 for emergency help.
If there is no bleeding, continue to the
secondary survey.
THE SECONDARY SURVEY
This is a detailed examination of a casualty
to look for other injuries or conditions that
may not be readily apparent on the primary
survey (pp.46–48). To do this, carry out a
head-to-toe examination (pp.49–51). Your
aim is to find out:
 ■ History What actually happened and any
relevant medical history.
 ■ Symptoms Injuries or abnormalities that the
casualty tells you about.
 ■ Signs Injuries or abnormalities that
you can see.
By checking the recognition features of the
different injuries and conditions explained in
the chapters of this book you can identify what
may be wrong. Record your findings and pass on
any relevant information to the medical team.
LEVEL OF RESPONSE
You will initially have noted whether or not
a casualty is conscious. He may have spoken to
you or made eye contact or some other
gesture (p.44). Or perhaps there has been no
response to your questions such as “Are you all
right?” or “What happened?” Now you need to
establish the level of response using the AVPU
scale (p.52). This is important because some
illnesses and injuries cause a deterioration in
a casualty’s level of response, so it is vital to
assess the level, then monitor him for changes.
SPECIAL CASE SEVERAL CASUALTIES
42
ASSESSING A CASUALTY
MECHANISMS OF INJURY
The type of injury that a person sustains is
directly related to how the injury is caused.
Whether a casualty sustains a single injury
or multiple injuries is also determined by the
mechanisms that caused it. This is the reason
why a history of the incident is important.
In many situations, this vital information can
be obtained only by those people who deal
with the casualty at the scene—often first
aiders. Look, too, at the circumstances in
which an injury was sustained and the
forces that were involved.
The information is useful because it also
helps the emergency services and medical
team predict the type and severity of injury, as
well as the treatment. This therefore helps the
diagnosis, treatment, and likely outcome for
the casualty.
CIRCUMSTANCES OF INJURY
The extent and type of injuries sustained due
to impact—for example, a fall from a height or
the impact of a car crash—can be predicted if
you know exactly how the incident happened.
For example, a car occupant is more likely to
sustain serious injuries in a side-impact collision
than in a frontal collision at the same speed.
This is because the side of the car provides less
protection and cannot absorb as much energy
as the front of the vehicle. For a driver wearing
a seatbelt whose vehicle is struck either headon or from behind, a specific pattern of injuries
can be suspected. The driver’s body will be
suddenly propelled one way, but the driver’s
head will lag behind briefly before moving. This
results in a “whiplashing” movement of the neck
(below). The casualty may also have injuries
caused by the seatbelt restraint; for example,
fracture of the breastbone and possibly bruising
of the heart or lungs. There may be injuries to
the face due to contact with the steering wheel
or an inflated airbag.
Whiplash
The head may be whipped
backward and then rapidly
forward, or vice versa, due to
sudden forces on the body, such
as in a car crash. This produces a
whiplash injury, with strained
muscles and stretched ligaments
in the neck.
43
MECHANISMS OF INJURY
Most serious injury
may be hidden
A first aider should keep the
casualty still, ask someone to
support her head, and call
911 for emergency help.
FORCES EXERTED ON THE BODY
The energy forces exerted during an impact are
another important indicator of the type or
severity of any injury. For example, if a man falls
from a height of 3 feet (1 m) or less onto hard
ground, he will probably suffer bruising but no
serious injury. A fall from a height of more than
10 feet (3 m), however, is more likely to produce
more serious injuries, such as a pelvic fracture
or internal bleeding. An apparently less serious
fall can mask a more dangerous injury. A fall
from a standing position in susceptible people,
like the elderly, those suffering from bone
disorders, or those who taking blood thinners,
can result in serious head or other injuries.
QUESTIONS TO ASK AT THE SCENE
When you are attending a casualty, ask the
casualty, or any witnesses, questions to try
to find out the mechanism of the injury.
Witnesses are especially important if the
casualty is unable to talk to you. Possible
questions include:
 ■ Was the casualty ejected from a vehicle?
 ■ Was the casualty wearing a seat belt?
 ■ Did the vehicle roll over?
 ■ Was the casualty wearing a helmet?
 ■ How far did the casualty fall?
 ■ What type of surface did she land on?
 ■ Is there evidence of body contact with
a solid object, such as the floor, a coffee
table, or a vehicle’s windshield?
 ■ How did she fall? (For example, twisting
falls can stretch or tear the ligaments
or tissues around a joint such as the
knee or ankle.)
Pass on all the information that you have
gathered to the emergency services (pp.21
and 23).
44
ASSESSING A CASUALTY
PRIMARY SURVEY
The primary survey is a quick, systematic
assessment of a casualty to establish if any
conditions or injuries sustained are life
threatening. By following a methodical
sequence using established techniques, each
life-threatening condition can be identified in a
priority order and dealt with on a “find and
treat” basis. The sequence should be applied to
every casualty you attend. You should not allow
yourself to be distracted from it by other events.
The chart opposite guides you through this
sequence. Depending on your findings you
may not move on to the next stage of the
assessment. Only when life-threatening
conditions are successfully managed, or there
are none, should you perform a secondary
survey (pp.46–48).
RESPONSE
At this point you need to make a quick
assessment to find out whether a casualty is
conscious or unconscious. Observe the casualty
as you approach. Introduce yourself even if he
does not appear to be responding to you. Ask
the casualty some questions, such as, “What
happened?” or “Are you all right?” or give a
command, such as “Open your eyes!” If there is
no initial response, gently shake the casualty’s
shoulders. If the casualty is a child, tap his
shoulder; if he is an infant, tap his foot. If there
is still no response, he is unconscious. If the
casualty responds and makes eye contact or
some other gesture, he is conscious.
Unconscious casualties take priority
and require urgent treatment (pp.54–87).
AIRWAY
The first step is to check that a casualty’s airway
is open and clear. If a casualty is alert and
talking to you, it follows that the airway is open
and clear. If, however, a casualty is unconscious,
the airway may be obstructed (p.59). You need
to open and clear the airway (adult, p.63; child,
p.73; infant, p.80)—do not move on to the next
stage until it is open and clear.
BREATHING
Is the casualty breathing normally? Look, listen,
and feel for breaths. If he is alert and/or talking
to you, he will be breathing. However, it is
important to note the rate, depth, and ease with
which he is breathing. For example, conditions
such as asthma (p.102) that cause breathing
difficulty require urgent treatment.
If an unconscious casualty is not breathing,
the heart will stop. Chest compressions and
rescue breaths (cardiopulmonary resuscitation/
CPR) must be started immediately (adult,
pp.66–71; child, pp.76–79; infant, pp.82–83).
CIRCULATION
Conditions that affect the circulation of blood
can be life threatening. Injuries that result in
severe bleeding (p.114–15) can cause blood loss
from the circulatory system, so they must be
treated immediately to minimize the risk of a
life-threatening condition known as shock
(pp.112–13).
Only when life-threatening conditions
have been stabilized, or there are none present,
should you make a detailed secondary survey
of the casualty (pp.46–48).
If you see the casualty suddenly lose consciousness
and fall to the ground, or other witnesses describe
those symptoms, assume sudden cardiac arrest
and immediately start CPR with chest compressions
(pp.66–67).
SPECIAL CASE
SUDDEN CARDIAC ARREST
PRIMARY SURVEY
45
THE ABC CHECK
If life-threatening conditions
are managed, or there are
none present, move on to
the secondary survey
(pp.46–48) to check for
other injury or illness.
CIRCULATION
Are there any signs of
severe bleeding?
UNCONSCIOUS CONSCIOUS UNCONSCIOUS CONSCIOUS
AIRWAY
Is the casualty’s airway
open and clear (adult,
pp.62–63; child, pp.72–73;
infant, p.80)?
BREATHING
is the casualty breathing
normally?
Look, listen, and feel for
breaths.
 ■ If the casualty is conscious,
treat conditions such as
choking or suffocation that
cause the airway to be blocked.
Go to the next stage,
BREATHING, when the airway
is open and clear.
 ■ If the casualty is unconscious,
tilt the head and lift the chin to
open the airway (adult, p.63;
child, p.73; infant, p.80). Go to
the next stage, BREATHING,
when the airway is open and
clear.
 ■ Treat any difficulty found; for
example, asthma.
Go to the next stage,
CIRCULATION
.
 ■ If the casualty is unconscious
and not breathing, call 911 for
emergency help. Begin chest
compressions and rescue
breaths (adult, pp.66–67; child,
pp.76–77; infant, pp.82–83). if
this happens, you are unlikely to
move on to the next stage.
 ■ Control the bleeding
(pp.114–15). Call 911 for
emergency help. Treat the
casualty to minimize the risk
of shock (pp.112–13).
NO
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
46
ASSESSING A CASUALTY
SECONDARY SURVEY
Once you have completed the primary survey
and dealt with any life-threatening conditions,
start the methodical process of checking
for other injuries or illnesses by performing
a head-to-toe examination. This is called the
secondary survey. Question the casualty and
the people around him. Make a note of your
findings if you can, and pass all the details
to the emergency services or hospital,
or whoever takes responsibility for the
casualty (p.29).
Ideally, the casualty should remain in the
position found, at least until you are satisfied
that it is safe to move him into a more
comfortable position appropriate for his
injury or illness.
This survey includes two further checks beyond
the ABC (pp.44–45).
 ■ Disability is the casualty’s level of
response (p.52).
 ■ Examine the casualty. You may need to
remove or cut away clothing to examine
and/or treat the injuries.
By conducting this survey you are
aiming to discover the following:
 ■ History What happened leading up to
the injury or sudden illness and any
relevant medical history.
 ■ Symptoms Information that the casualty
gives you about his condition.
 ■ Signs you find on examination of
the casualty.
HISTORY
There are two important aspects to the
history: what happened, and any previous
medical history.
EVENT HISTORY
The first consideration is to find out what
happened. Your initial questions should help
you discover the immediate events leading up
to the incident. The casualty can usually tell
you this, but sometimes you have to rely on
information from people nearby so it is
important to verify that they are telling you
facts and not just their opinions. There may
also be clues, such as the impact on a vehicle,
which can indicate the likely nature of the
casualty’s injury. This is often referred to as the
mechanism of injury (pp.42–43).
PREVIOUS MEDICAL HISTORY
The second aspect to consider is a person’s
medical history. While this may have nothing
to do with the present condition, it could be
a clue to the cause. Clues to the existence
of such a condition may include a medical
bracelet or medication in the casualty’s
possessions (p.48).
TAKING A HISTORY
 ■ Ask what happened; for example, establish
whether the incident is due to illness or
an accident.
 ■ Ask about medication the casualty is taking.
 ■ Ask about medical history. Find out if there
are ongoing and previous conditions.
 ■ Find out if a person has any allergies,
including to any medications or latex.
 ■ Check when the person last had something
to eat or drink.
 ■ Note the presence of a medical warning
bracelet—this may indicate an ongoing
medical condition, such as epilepsy, diabetes,
or anaphylaxis.
47
SECONDARY SURVEY
Listen to the casualty
Make eye contact with the casualty as you talk
to him. Keep your questions simple, and listen
carefully to the symptoms he describes.
SYMPTOMS
These are the sensations that the casualty
feels and describes to you. When you talk to
the casualty, ask him to give you as much
detail as possible. For example, if he complains
of pain, ask where it is. Ask him to describe the
pain (is it constant or intermittent, sharp or
dull). Ask him what makes the pain better (or
worse), whether it is affected by movement
or breathing, and, if it did not result from an
injury, where and how it began. The casualty
may describe other symptoms, too, such as
nausea, giddiness, heat, cold, or thirst. Listen
very carefully to his answers (p.20) and do not
interrupt him while he is speaking.
SIGNS
These are features such as swelling, bleeding,
discoloration, deformity, and smells that
you can detect by observing and feeling
the casualty, rather than asking the casualty
questions. Use your senses—look, listen,
feel, and smell—to get a complete picture.
Always compare the injured and uninjured
sides of the body. You may also notice that
the person is unable to perform normal
functions, such as moving his limbs or
standing. Make a note of any obvious
superficial injuries, going back to treat
them only when you have completed
your examination.
Compare both sides of the body
Always compare the injured part of the body
with the uninjured side. Check for swelling,
deformity, and discoloration.
QUICK REMINDER
Use the mnemonic A M P L E as a reminder
when assessing a casualty to ensure that you have
covered all aspects of the casualty's history. When
the emergency services arrive, they may ask:
A—Allergy—does the person have any allergies?
M—Medications—is the person on any medication?
P—Previous medical history—do you know of any
preexisting conditions?
L—Last meal—when did the person last eat?
E—Event history—what happened?
»
48
ASSESSING A CASUALTY
« SECONDARY SURVEY
LOOK FOR EXTERNAL CLUES
As part of your assessment, look for external
clues to a casualty’s condition. If you suspect
drug abuse, take care because he may be
carrying needles and syringes. You may
find an appointment card for a hospital or
clinic, or a card indicating a history of allergy,
diabetes, or epilepsy. Horseback-riders or
cyclists may carry such a card inside their
riding hat or helmet. Food or medication
may also give valuable clues about the
casualty’s condition; for example, people
with diabetes may carry sugar packets
or glucose gel. A person with a known
disorder may have medical warning
information on a special bracelet or medallion,
(such as a “MedicAlert”). Keep any such
item with the casualty or give it to the
emergency services.
If you need to search a casualty’s belongings,
always try to ask first and perform the search
in front of a reliable witness (p.21).
MEDICATION
A casualty may be carrying medication such as
anti-inflammatories for back pain or nitroglycerine
for angina.
MEDICAL BRACELET
This may be inscribed with information about a casualty’s
medical history (e.g., epilepsy, diabetes, or anaphylaxis), or
there may be a number to call.
PUFFER/INHALER
The presence of an inhaler usually indicates that
the casualty has asthma or other diseases that can cause
wheezing or difficulty breathing.
INSULIN PEN
This may indicate that a person has diabetes.
The casualty may also have a glucose testing kit.
AUTO-INJECTOR
This contains epinephrine (adrenaline), for people at
risk of anaphylactic shock. The pens are color coded
for adult and child doses.
MEDICAL CLUES
49
SECONDARY SURVEY | HEAD-TO-TOE EXAMINATION
»
Once you have taken the casualty’s history
(p.46) and asked about any symptoms she
has (p.47), you should carry out a detailed
examination. Use your senses when you
examine a casualty: look, listen, feel, and smell.
Always start at the head and work down;
this “head-to-toe” routine is both easily
remembered and thorough. You may have to
open, cut away, or remove clothing that is
covering an injury, or if the casualty feels pain
in a particular area. Always be sensitive to a
casualty’s privacy and dignity, and ask her
permission before doing this.
Protect yourself and the casualty by
wearing disposable gloves. Make sure that
you do not move the casualty more than is
strictly necessary. If possible, examine a
conscious casualty in the position in which you
find her, or one that best suits her condition,
unless her life is in immediate danger. If an
unconscious breathing casualty has been
placed in the recovery position, leave her in
this position while you carry out the head-totoe examination.
Check the casualty’s breathing and pulse
rates (pp.52–53), then work from her head
downward. Initially, note minor injuries
but continue your examination to make
sure that you do not miss any concealed
potentially serious conditions; return to
them only when you have completed
your examination.
HEAD-TO-TOE EXAMINATION
■ Pain ■ Anxiety ■ Heat ■ Cold ■ Loss of sensation ■ Abnormal
sensation ■ Thirst ■ Nausea ■ Tingling ■ Pain on touch or pressure
■ Faintness ■ Stiffness ■ Momentary unconsciousness ■ Weakness
■ Memory loss ■ Dizziness ■ Sensation of broken bone ■ Sense of
impending doom
The casualty may tell you of these
symptoms
METHOD OF IDENTIFICATION SYMPTOMS OR SIGNS
You may see these signs
You may feel these signs
You may hear these signs
You may smell these signs
■ Anxiety and painful expression ■ Unusual chest movement
■ Burns ■ Sweating ■ Wounds ■ Bleeding from orifices ■ Response
to touch ■ Response to speech ■ Bruising ■ Abnormal skin color
■ Muscle spasm ■ Swelling ■ Deformity ■ Foreign bodies ■ Needle
marks ■ Vomit ■ Incontinence ■ Loss of normal movement
■ Containers and other circumstantial evidence
■ Dampness ■ Abnormal body temperature ■ Swelling ■ Deformity
■ Irregularity ■ Grating bone ends
■ Noisy or distressed breathing ■ Groaning ■ Sucking sounds from a
penetrating chest injury ■ Response to touch ■ Response to speech
■ Grating bone (crepitus)
■ Acetone ■ Alcohol ■ Burning ■ Gas or fumes ■ Solvents or glue
■ Urine ■ Feces ■ Cannabis

POSSIBLE FINDINGS ON CARRYING OUT AN EXAMINATION
50
ASSESSING A CASUALTY
Look at the skin. Note the color and
temperature: is it pale, flushed, or gray-blue
(cyanosis); is it hot or cold, dry or damp? Pale, cold,
sweaty (clammy) skin suggests shock; a flushed,
hot face suggests fever or heatstroke. A blue tinge
indicates lack of oxygen; look for this in the lips,
ears, and face.
Check the nose for discharges as you did for
the ears. Look for clear fluid or watery blood
(or a mixture of both) coming from either nostril.
Soot around the nostrils or singed nasal hairs might
indicate serious airway burns.
7
5
Look in the mouth for anything that might
obstruct the airway. If the casualty has
dentures that are intact and fit firmly, leave them.
Look for mouth wounds or burns and check for
irregularity in the line of the teeth.
6
HEAD-TO-TOE EXAMINATION
Loosen clothing around the neck, and
look for signs such as a medical warning
necklace (p.48) or a hole (stoma) in the windpipe.
Run your fingers gently along the spine from the
base of the skull down as far as possible without
moving the casualty; check for irregularity,
swelling, tenderness, or deformity.
Assess breathing (p.52). Check the rate
(fast or slow), depth (shallow or deep), and
nature (is it easy or difficult, noisy or quiet).
Check the pulse (p.53). Assess the rate (fast or
slow), rhythm (regular or irregular) and strength
(strong or weak).
Start the physical examination at the
casualty's head. Run your hands carefully
over the scalp to feel for bleeding, swelling, or
depression, which may indicate a fracture. Be
careful not to move the casualty if you suspect
that she may have injured her neck.
WHAT TO DO
1
2
8
«
Speak clearly to the casualty in both ears
to find out if she responds or if she can hear.
Look for clear fluid or watery blood coming from
either ear. These discharges may be signs of a
serious head injury (pp.144–45).
3
Examine both eyes. Note whether they are
open. Check the size of the pupils (the black
area). If the pupils are not the same size it may
indicate head injury. Look for any foreign object,
or blood in the whites of the eyes.
4
51
HEAD-TO-TOE EXAMINATION
Check that the casualty has no abnormal
sensations in the arms or fingers. If the
fingertips are pale or gray-blue there may be a
problem with blood circulation. Look out for
needle marks on the forearms, or a medical
warning bracelet (p.48).
If there is any impairment in movement or loss
of sensation in the limbs, do not move the
casualty to examine the spine, since these signs
suggest spinal injury. Otherwise, gently pass your
hand under the hollow of the back and check for
swelling and tenderness.
11
12
Gently feel the casualty’s abdomen to detect
any evidence of bleeding, and to identify any
rigidity or tenderness of the abdomen’s muscular
wall, which could be a sign of internal bleeding.
Compare one side of the abdomen with the other.
Note any bruising on the abdomen or pelvis.
13
Check the legs. Look and feel for bleeding,
swelling, deformity, or tenderness. Ask the
casualty to raise each leg in turn, and to move
her ankles and knees.
Feel both sides of the hips, and examine the
pelvis for signs of fracture. Check clothing
for any evidence of incontinence, which suggests
spinal or bladder injury, or bleeding from orifices,
which suggests pelvic fracture.
15
14
Check the movement and feeling in the
toes. Check that the vicitm has no
abnormal sensations in her feet or toes.
Compare the feet. Look at the skin color:
gray-blue skin may indicate a circulatory
disorder or an injury due to cold.
16
Look at the chest. Ask the casualty to breathe
deeply, and note whether the chest expands
evenly, easily, and equally on both sides. Feel the
rib cage to check for deformity, irregularity, or
tenderness. Ask the casualty if she is aware of
grating sensations when breathing, and listen for
unusual sounds. Note whether breathing causes
any pain. Look for any external injuries, such as
bleeding or stab wounds.
Feel along the collarbones, shoulders, upper
arms, elbows, hands, and fingers for any
swelling, tenderness, or deformity. Check the
movements of the elbows, wrists, and fingers
by asking the casualty to bend and straighten
each joint.
10
9
52
ASSESSING A CASUALTY
MONITORING VITAL SIGNS
When treating a casualty, you may need to
assess and monitor his breathing, pulse, and
level of response. This information can help you
identify problems and indicate changes in a
casualty’s condition. Monitoring should be
repeated regularly, and your findings recorded
and handed over to the medical assistance
taking over (p.21).
In addition, if a casualty has a condition that
affects his body temperature, such as fever,
heatstroke, or hypothermia, you will also need
to monitor his temperature.
You need to monitor a casualty’s level of
response to assess her level of consciousness
and any change in her condition. Any injury
or illness that affects the brain may affect
consciousness, and any deterioration is
potentially serious. Assess the level of response
using the AVPU scale (right) and make a note of
any deterioration or improvement.
 ■ A—Is the casualty Alert? Are her eyes open
and does she respond to questions?
 ■ V—Does the casualty respond to Voice? Can
she answer questions and obey commands?
 ■ P—Does the casualty respond to Pain? Does
she open her eyes or move if pinched?
 ■ U—Is the casualty Unresponsive to any
stimulus (i.e. unconscious)?
LEVEL OF RESPONSE
When assessing a casualty’s breathing, check
the breathing rate and listen for any breathing
difficulties or unusual noises.
An adult’s normal breathing rate is 12–16
breaths per minute; in babies and young
children, it is 20–30 breaths per minute.
When checking breathing, listen for breaths
and watch the casualty’s chest movements.
For a baby or young child, it might be easier
to place your hand on the chest and feel
for movement of breathing. Record the
following information:
 ■ Rate—count the number of breaths
per minute.
 ■ Depth—are the breaths deep or shallow
 ■ Ease—are the breaths easy, difficult
or painful?
 ■ Noise—is the breathing quiet or noisy, and if
noisy, what are the types of noise?
BREATHING
Checking a casualty’s breathing rate
Observe the chest movements and count the number
of breaths per minute. Use a watch to time breaths.
For a baby or young child, place your hand on the
chest and feel for movement.
53
MONITORING VITAL SIGNS
Brachial pulse
Place the pads of two fingers
on the inner side of an infant’s
upper arm.
Digital thermometer
Used to measure temperature
under the tongue or in the armpit.
Leave it in place until it makes a
beeping sound (about 30 seconds),
then read the display.
Radial pulse
Place the pads of two or three
fingers below the wrist creases at
the base of the thumb.
Forehead thermometer
A heat-sensitive strip for use on a
small child. Hold against the child’s
forehead for about 30 seconds. The
color on the strip indicates
temperature.
Carotid pulse
Place the pads of two fingers in the
hollow between the large neck
muscle and the windpipe.
Ear sensor
Place the probe inside the ear.
Press the measurement key wait
for a beeping sound, then read the
display. This thermometer can be
used while a person is asleep.
PULSE
BODY TEMPERATURE
Each heartbeat creates a wave of pressure as
blood is pumped along the arteries (pp.108–09).
Where arteries lie close to the skin surface,
such as on the inside of the wrist and at the
neck, this pressure wave can be felt as a
pulse. The normal pulse rate in adults is
60–100 beats per minute. The rate is faster
in children and may be slower in very fit
adults. An abnormally fast or slow pulse may
be a sign of illness.
The pulse may be felt at the wrist (radial pulse),
or if this is not possible, the neck (carotid pulse).
In babies, the pulse in the upper arm (brachial
pulse) is easier to find.
When checking a pulse, use your fingers
(not your thumb) and press lightly against the
skin. Record the following points.
 ■ Rate (number of beats per minute).
 ■ Strength (strong or weak).
 ■ Rhythm (regular or irregular).
Although not a vital sign, low or high body
temperature may be an important indicator of
a life-threatening problem. You can feel
exposed skin but use a thermometer to obtain
an accurate reading. Normal body temperature
is 98.6°F (37°C) but can be slightly higher or
lower. A temperature above 100.4ºF (38ºC) is
usually caused by infection, but can be the
result of heat exhaustion or heatstroke
(pp.184–85). A lower body temperature may
result from exposure to cold and/or wet
conditions—hypothermia (p.186–88)—or it may
be a sign of life-threatening infection or shock
(pp.112–13). There are several different types of
thermometer; see below.
To stay alive we need an adequate supply
of oxygen to enter the lungs and be
transferred to all cells in the body by the
circulating blood. If a person is deprived
of oxygen for any length of time, the
brain will begin to fail. As a result, the
casualty will eventually lose consciousness,
breathing will cease, the heart will stop,
and death results. The airway must be kept
open so that breathing can occur, allowing
oxygen to enter the lungs and be circulated
in the body.
The priority of a first aider when treating
any unconscious casualty is to assess for
breathing and immediately begin CPR with
chest compressions if breathing is absent.
An automated external defibrillator (AED)
may be required to “shock” the heart back
into a normal rhythm. This chapter outlines
the priorities to remember when dealing
with a casualty who has lost consciousness
for any reason.
There are important differences in the
treatment of unconscious children and
adults; this chapter gives separate step-bystep instructions for dealing with each of
these groups.
 ■ To maintain an open airway, to check breathing and
resuscitate if required.
 ■ To call 911for emergency help.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
4
THE UNCONSCIOUS
CASUALTY
56
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
BREATHING AND CIRCULATION
Oxygen is essential to support life. Without it,
cells in the body die—those in the brain survive
only a few minutes without oxygen. Oxygen is
taken in when we inhale (pp.90–91), and it is
then circulated to all the body tissues via the
circulatory system (p.108). It is vital to maintain
breathing and circulation in order to sustain life.
The process of breathing enables air, which
contains oxygen, to be taken into the air sacs
(alveoli) in the lungs. Here, the oxygen is
transferred across blood vessel walls into the
blood, where it combines with blood cells. At
the same time, the waste product of breathing,
carbon dioxide, is released and exhaled in the
breath. When oxygen has been transferred to
the blood cells it is carried from the lungs to the
heart through the pulmonary veins. The heart
pumps the oxygenated blood to the rest of the
body via blood vessels called arteries.
After oxygen is given up to the body tissues,
deoxygenated blood is brought back to the
heart by blood vessels called veins (p.108). The
heart pumps this blood to the lungs via the
pulmonary arteries, where the carbon dioxide is
released and the blood is reoxygenated before
circulating around the body again.
SEE ALSO How breathing works p.91 | The heart and blood vessels pp.108–09 | The respiratory system pp.90-91
How the heart and lungs
work together
Air containing oxygen is taken into the
lungs via the mouth and nose. Blood
is pumped from the heart to the lungs,
where it absorbs oxygen. Oxygenated
blood is returned to the heart before
being pumped around the body.
Exchange of gases in the air sacs
Carbon dioxide passes out of
blood cells into air sacs (alveoli).
Oxygen crosses the walls of
alveoli into blood cells.
Red blood cell
Air sac
(alveolus)
Lungs
Heart pumps
oxygenated blood
around the body
Direction of
carbon dioxide
flow
Direction of
oxygen flow
Oxygenated blood
returns from the lungs
to the heart
Fresh oxygen is drawn into the lungs via the
nose and mouth by the windpipe (trachea)
Oxygenated blood
leaves the heart to
be circulated around
the body via the aorta
Deoxygenated
blood returns
from body
tissue to
the heart
Deoxygenated
blood is pumped
to the lungs by the
heart through the
pulmonary
arteries
57
BREATHING AND CIRCULATION | LIFE-SAVING PRIORITIES
LIFE-SAVING PRIORITIES
The procedures set out in this chapter can
maintain a casualty’s circulation and breathing
until emergency help arrives.
With an unconscious casualty who is not
breathing normally, your priorities can be
remembered by the initials C-A-B. Upon
determining that the casualty is not breathing,
begin chest compressions (C) immediately
to maintain blood circulation (to get
oxygenated blood to the tissues). After
providing the initial circulation for the
casualty, it is important to maintain an open
airway (A) and to breathe for the casualty (B)
to get oxygen into the body. In an adult
during the first minutes after the heart stops
(cardiac arrest), the blood oxygen level
remains constant, so chest compressions are
more important than rescue breaths in the
initial phase of resuscitation. After two to
four minutes, the blood oxygen level falls and
rescue breathing becomes important as well.
The combination of chest compressions and
rescue breaths is called cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, or CPR. In a child or infant, a
problem with breathing is the most likely
reason for the heart to stop.
In addition to CPR, a machine called an
automated external defibrillator (AED) can
be used to deliver an electric shock that may
restore a normal heartbeat (pp.84–87).
CHEST COMPRESSION–ONLY CPR
If you have not had any formal training in CPR,
or you are unwilling or unable to give rescue
breaths, you can give chest compressions
only. The 911 dispatcher will give instructions
for performing chest compression-only
CPR (pp.70–71).
Call 911 for
emergency help.
Look for an available
AED or send a
bystander for one.
Chest compressions
and rescue breaths
are used to “buy
time” until expert
help arrives.
A controlled electric
shock from an AED
is given. This can
“shock” the heart into
a normal rhythm.
Specialized treatment
by paramedics and
in the hospital
stabilizes the casualty’s
condition.
EARLY ADVANCED
CARE
EARLY
DEFIBRILLATION
EARLY HELP EARLY CPR
»
Chain of survival
Four elements increase the chances of a collapsed
casualty surviving. If any one of the elements in this
chain is missing, the chances of survival are reduced.
58
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
If the heart stops beating, blood does not
circulate through the body. As a result, vital
organs—most importantly the brain—become
starved of oxygen. Brain cells are unable to
survive for more than three to four minutes
without a supply of oxygen.
Some circulation can be maintained artificially
by chest compressions (pp.66–67). These act as a
mechanical aid to the heart in order to get blood
flowing around the body. Pushing vertically
down on the center of the chest increases the
pressure in the chest cavity, expelling blood from
the heart and forcing it into the tissues. As
pressure on the chest is released, the chest
recoils, or comes back up, and more blood is
“sucked” into the heart; this blood is then forced
out of the heart by the next compression.
To ensure that the blood is supplied with enough
oxygen, chest compressions should be combined
with rescue breathing (opposite). However, even if
you do not feel comfortable providing rescue
breaths or are not trained to do so, it is very
important that you still provide chest compressions.
A machine called an AED (automated
external defibrillator) can be used to attempt
to restart the heart when it has stopped
(pp.84–87). The earlier the AED is used, the
greater the chance of the casualty surviving.
With each minute’s delay, the casualty’s
chances of survival fall. AEDs can be used
safely and effectively without training.
These machines can now be found in many
public places, such as railroad and bus stations,
shopping centers, airports, and government
buildings. They are generally housed in
cabinets, often marked with a lightning bolt,
and placed where they can be easily found and
accessed. The cabinets are not locked, but
most are fitted with an alarm that is activated
when the door is opened.
RESTORING HEART RHYTHM
IMPORTANCE OF MAINTAINING CIRCULATION
USING AN AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR
GIVING CHEST COMPRESSIONS
«LIFE-SAVING PRIORITIES
59
LIFE-SAVING PRIORITIES
An unconscious casualty’s airway can become
narrowed or blocked. This may be due to
muscular control being lost, which allows
the tongue to fall back and block the airway.
When this happens, the casualty’s breathing
becomes difficult and noisy and may stop.
Lifting the chin and tilting the head back
lifts the tongue away from the entrance
to the air passage, allowing delivery of
rescue breaths.
Exhaled air contains about 16 percent oxygen
(only five percent less than inhaled air) and a
small amount of carbon dioxide. Your exhaled
breath therefore contains enough oxygen to
supply another person with oxygen—and
potentially keep him alive—when it is forced
into his lungs during rescue breathing.
By giving rescue breaths (p.67), you force
air into his air passages. This reaches the
air sacs (alveoli) in the lungs, and oxygen is
then transferred through tiny blood vessels
(capillaries) to red blood cells.
When you take your mouth away from the
casualty’s, his chest falls, and air containing
waste products is pushed out, or exhaled, from
his lungs. This process, performed together with
chest compressions (pp.66–67), can supply the
tissues with oxygen until help arrives.
AN OPEN AIRWAY
BREATHING FOR A CASUALTY
Blocked airway
In an unconscious
casualty, the
tongue falls back,
blocking the
throat and airway.
Open airway
In the head tilt,
chin lift position,
the tongue is
lifted from the
back of the
throat and the
trachea is open,
so the airway
will be clear.
Tongue
blocking
airway
Tongue free
of airway
Air cannot
enter
Air entering
airway
AGONAL BREATHING
This type of breathing usually takes the form
of short, irregular gasps for breath. It is common in
the first few minutes after a cardiac arrest. It should
not be mistaken for normal breathing and, if it is
present, chest compressions and rescue breaths
(cardiopulmonary resuscitation/CPR) should be
started without hesitation.
GIVING RESCUE BREATHS
»
CAUTION
60
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
This action plan shows the order for the
techniques you need to use when attending a
collapsed adult. The plan assumes that you
have already established that neither you nor
the casualty is in immediate danger. More
detailed explanations of each of the
techniques shown here are given on the
following pages.
ADULT RESUSCITATION
Leave the casualty in the position
found, check and treat lifethreatening injuries, and summon
help, if needed following the ABC
check (p.45).
 ■ Try to get a response by asking
questions and gently shaking his
shoulders (p.62).
Is there a response?
If possible, leave the casualty in
the position found. Check and
treat life-threatening injuries. If
he does not have have a spine
injury, place him in the recovery
position (pp.64–65). Call 911 for
emergency help.
 ■ Is the casualty breathing normally (not just agonal
breathing, or short, irregular gasps (p.59).
Is he breathing normally?
 ■ Use the AED as soon as it is
available.
 ■ Give 30 chest compressions
(p.66–67).
 ■ Give TWO rescue breaths (p.67)
 ■ Alternate 30 chest compressions
with TWO rescue breaths until
help arrives, the person shows
signs of regaining consciousness,
such as coughing, opening his
eyes, speaking, or moving
purposefully, and starts to
breathe normally, or you are too
exhausted to continue.
 ■ If the airway is not obviously obstructed and the casualty is not breathing
or is just gasping, ask a helper to call 911 and get an AED, and begin CPR
with chest compressions (pp.66-67).
 ■ If you are alone, make the call yourself, and if an AED is nearby, use it
before starting compressions (pp.84-87).
CHECK CASUALTY’S RESPONSE
BEGIN CPR
NO
NO
YES
YES
«LIFE-SAVING PRIORITIES
 ■ If you have not had formal
training in CPR, or you are
unwilling or unable to give rescue
breaths, you can give chest
compressions only (pp.70–71).
The ambulance dispatcher will
give instructions for chestcompression-only CPR.
 ■ If the casualty starts breathing
normally but remains
unconscious, place him in the
recovery position (pp.64–65).
61
LIFE-SAVING PRIORITIES
This action plan shows the order for the
techniques to use when attending a child
between the ages of one and puberty or an
infant under one year. A breathing problem is
the most likely cause of cardiac arrest but chest
compressions are given first.
CHILD/INFANT RESUSCITATION
Leave the child in the position
found, Use the primary survey
(pp.44–45) to identify the serious
injury and treat in order of priority.
If possible, leave the casualty in
the position found. Check and
treat life-threatening injuries. If
she does not have have a spine
injury, place the child in the
recovery position (pp.74–75), or
hold infant (p.81). Call 911 for
emergency help.
 ■ It is better to give a combination
of rescue breaths and chest
compressions with infants and
children. However, if you have
not had formal training in CPR,
or you are unwilling or unable
to give rescue breaths, you may
give chest compressions only
(pp.70–71). The dispatcher will
give instructions for chestcompression-only CPR.
 ■ If the child starts breathing
normally but remains
unconscious, place her in the
recovery position (child, pp.74–75,
infant, p.81).
 ■ Try to get a response by asking
questions and gently tapping
the child’s shoulder or an
infant’s foot.
Is there a response?
Is she breathing normally?
Send a helper to call 911 for emergency help.
 ■ Ask the helper to bring an AED, preferably one with pediatric pads (pp.84–
87). For an infant (under 1 year of age), a manual external defribrillator is
preferred, but if it is not available, an adult AED can be used.
 ■ If you are alone, perform 2 minutes of CPR, beginning with chest
compressions, and then call 911, and if an AED is nearby, use it.
 ■ Tilt the head back and lift the chin
to open the airway (child, p.77, or
infant, p.83).
 ■ Carefully remove any visible
obstruction from the mouth.
 ■ Give TWO rescue breaths.
 ■ Give 30 chest compressions
(child, p.76, or infant, p.83).
 ■ Follow with 2 rescue breaths.
 ■ Allternate 30 chest compressions
with 2 rescue breaths until
emergency help arrives, the child
starts breathing normally or you are
too exhausted to continue.
GIVING RESCUE BREATHS
CHECK CHILD’S RESPONSE
BEGIN CPR
NO
NO
YES
YES
62
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
The following pages describe techniques for
the management of an unconscious adult who
may require resuscitation.
Always approach and treat the casualty from
the side, kneeling down next to his head or
chest. You will then be in the correct position
to perform all stages of resuscitation: checking
responsiveness and breathing; chest
compressions; opening the airway; and giving
rescue breaths (together called cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, or CPR). At each stage in the
process you will have decisions to make—for
example, is the casualty breathing? The steps
given here tell you what to do next.
The first priority is to determine responsiveness
and to assess breathing. If the casualty is not
responsive and not breathing or just gasping, you
must begin chest compressions. If the casualty is
breathing, place him in the recovery position. If
you find the casualty slumped or not on his back,
and you do not suspect a spinal injury, first place
him on his back so that you can best assess him.
On discovering a collapsed casualty, you should first make sure
the scene is safe and then establish whether he is conscious or
unconscious. Do this by gently shaking the casualty’s shoulders.
Ask “What happened?” or give a command such as, “Open your
eyes.” Always speak loudly and clearly to the casualty.
HOW TO CHECK RESPONSE
If there is no further danger, leave the
casualty in the position in which he was
found, check for life-threatening injuries, and
summon help if needed.
Shout for help. Leave the casualty in the
position in which he was found and assess
for breathing.
Treat any condition found and monitor
and record vital signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)—until
emergency help arrives or the casualty recovers.
If you are unable to assess the casualty for
breathing in the position in which he was
found, get help to turn him over using the
log-roll technique (p.159). If seeking help to roll
the casualty will cause significant delay, you
should roll him yourself, as carefully as possible.
1
1
2
2
IF THERE IS NO RESPONSE
IF THERE IS A RESPONSE
 ■ Always assume that there is
a neck injury and shake the
shoulders very gently.
UNCONSCIOUS ADULT
CAUTION
63
UNCONSCIOUS ADULT
In an unresponsive casualty, simply look at him
to see whether or not he is breathing normally.
Occasional gasps (agonal breathing) do not
constitute normal breathing, and if you see this,
you should treat it as if he were not breathing at
all and begin chest compressions.
HOW TO CHECK BREATHING
Check the casualty for any life-threatening
injuries, such as severe bleeding, and
treat as necessary.
Monitor and record vital signs—level of
response, breathing and pulse (pp.52–53)
—while waiting for help to arrive.
Send a helper to call 911 for emergency
help. Ask the person to bring an AED if
one is available. If you are alone, make the call
yourself unless the condition is the result of
drowning (p.100). Place the casualty in the recovery position
(pp.64–65) and call 911 for emergency help.
Begin CPR with chest compressions
(pp.66–67).
1
3
1
2
2
IF THE CASUALTY IS NOT BREATHING IF THE CASUALTY IS BREATHING
»
64
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
If the casualty is found lying on his side
or front, rather than his back, not all the
following steps will be necessary to place him
in the recovery position. If the mechanisms
of injury suggest a spinal injury, treat as
on pp.157–59.
WHAT TO DO
Kneel beside the
casualty. Remove his
glasses and any bulky objects,
such as mobile phones or
large bunches of keys, from
his pockets. Do not search his
pockets for small items.
Make sure that both
of the casualty’s legs are
straight. Place the arm that is
closest to you at right angles
to the casualty’s body, with
the elbow bent and the palm
facing upward.
2
1
4
3
HOW TO PLACE CASUALTY IN RECOVERY POSITION
Keeping the casualty’s
hand pressed against his
cheek, pull on the far leg and
roll the casualty toward you
and onto his side.
Bring the arm that is
farthest from you across
the casualty’s chest, and
hold the back of his hand
against the cheek closest to
you. With your other hand,
grasp the far leg just above the
knee and pull it up, keeping the
foot flat on the ground.
«UNCONSCIOUS ADULT
65
UNCONSCIOUS ADULT
If necessary, adjust the hand under the cheek
to keep the airway open.
Tilt the casualty’s head back and tilt his chin so
that the airway remains open (p.63).
If it has not already been done, call 911 for
emergency help. Monitor and record vital
signs—level of response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—while waiting for help to arrive.
If the casualty has to be left in the recovery
position for longer than 30 minutes, roll
him onto his back, and then roll him onto the
opposite side—unless other injuries prevent you
from doing this.
Adjust the upper leg so that both the hip and
the knee are bent at right angles. 5 7
6
8
9
If you suspect a spinal injury (pp.157–59) and
need to place the casualty in the recovery
position, try to keep the spine straight.
 ■ If you are alone, use the technique shown
opposite and above.
 ■ If you have a helper, one of you should
steady the head while the other turns the
casualty (right).
 ■ With three people, one person should steady
the head while another turns the casualty.
The third person should keep the casualty’s
back straight during the maneuver.
 ■ If there are four or more people in total,
use the log-roll technique (p.159).
»
SPECIAL CASE RECOVERY POSITION FOR SUSPECTED SPINAL INJURY
66
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
Place your hand on the casualty’s breastbone as
indicated here. Make sure that you do not press on
the casualty’s ribs, the lower tip of the breastbone
(the xiphoid process), or the upper abdomen.
WHAT TO DO
Kneel beside the casualty level with his chest.
Place the heel of one hand on the center of
the casualty’s chest. You can identify the correct
hand position for chest compressions through a
casualty’s clothing.
Place the heel of your other hand on top
of the first hand, and interlock your fingers,
making sure the fingers are kept off the ribs.
Leaning over the casualty, with your arms
straight, press down vertically on the
breastbone and depress the chest by at least 2 in
(5 cm). Release the pressure without removing your
hands from his chest. Allow the chest to come back
up fully (recoil) before giving the next compression.
2
1
3
HAND POSITION
Hand position
Ribs
Breastbone
Upper
abdomen
Lower tip of
breastbone
HOW TO GIVE CPR
«UNCONSCIOUS ADULT
67
UNCONSCIOUS ADULT
If there is more than one rescuer,
change over every 2 minutes
(after 5 cycles of CPR) with
minimal interruption to chest
compressions.
Open the airway with the
head tilt–chin lift maneuver:
put one hand on his forehead
and two fingers of the other
hand under the bony tip of his
chin. Move the hand that was on
the forehead down to pinch the
soft part of the nose with the
finger and thumb. Allow the
casualty’s mouth to fall open.
Maintaining head tilt and
chin lift, take your mouth
off the casualty’s mouth and
look to see his chest fall. If his
chest rises visibly as you blow
and falls fully when you lift your
mouth away, you have given
a rescue breath. Give a second
rescue breath.
Take a breath and place
your lips around the
casualty’s mouth, making sure
you have a good seal. Blow into
the casualty’s mouth until his
chest rises. A complete rescue
breath should take one second.
If the chest does not rise, you
may need to adjust the head
position (p.63).
Continue the cycle of
30 chest compressions
followed by 2 rescue breaths
until: emergency help arrives
and takes over; the casualty
shows signs of regaining
consciousness, such as
coughing, opening his eyes,
moving purposefully, and starts
to breathe normally; or you are
too exhausted to continue.
Compress the chest 30
times at a rate of at least
100 compressions per minute.
The time taken for compression
and release should be about
the same.
4 5
6 7 8
»
CAUTION
68
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
There are circumstances that make the normal
steps for CPR more challenging. For example:
 ■ If you have not been trained in CPR or are
unwilling or unable to give rescue breaths,
you can give chest compressions only (pp.70–
71). If you call 911, the dispatcher will give you
instructions for compression-only CPR.
 ■ If there is more than one rescuer, change over
every 2 minutes, with minimal interruption to
chest compressions.
 ■ If the casualty vomits during CPR, roll him
away from you onto his side, ensuring that his
head is turned toward the floor to allow vomit
to drain away. Clear any residual debris from
his mouth, then immediately roll him onto his
back again and recommence CPR.
 ■ If a woman in the late stages of pregnancy
requires CPR, raise her right hip off the
ground by tilting it upward before you begin
chest compressions (see below).
 ■ Modified rescue breathing may be necessary
in some cases: for example, if a casualty has
mouth or oral injuries, you can give rescue
breaths through the nose (opposite). A
casualty may breathe through a hole in the
front of the neck—a stoma (opposite). You
can also use a pocket mask or face shield
when giving rescue breaths.
If a casualty’s chest does not rise when giving
rescue breaths:
 ■ Recheck the head tilt and chin lift;
 ■ Recheck the casualty’s mouth. Remove any
obvious obstructions, but do not do a finger
sweep of the mouth.
Make no more than two attempts to achieve rescue
breaths before repeating chest compressions.
If a heavily pregnant woman is lying on her
back, the pregnant uterus will press against the
large blood vessels in the abdomen. This
restricts blood from the lower part of the body
from returning to the heart, which reduces
the amount of blood circulation that can be
achieved with chest compressions. To prevent
this from happening, tilt her right hip upward.
CPR IN LATE STAGES OF PREGNANCY
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CPR
Positioning the woman
Keep the woman's upper body as
flat on the floor as possible in order
to give good-quality compressions.
Raise her right hip and ask a helper
to kneel beside the woman so that
his knees are underneath the
raised hip. If you are on your own,
place tightly rolled up clothing or
towels under the woman’s hip
to lift it.
PROBLEMS WITH RESCUE BREATHING
«UNCONSCIOUS ADULT
69
UNCONSCIOUS ADULT
FACE SHIELDS AND POCKET MASKS
Face shields are plastic barriers with a filter that
is placed over the casualty’s mouth. A pocket
mask has a mouthpiece through which breaths
are given. If you know how to use one of these
aids, you should carry it with you and use it
whenever you need to resuscitate a casualty.
There are some cases where mouth-to-mouth
rescue breaths are not appropriate and you
need to use a mouth-to-nose or mouth-tostoma technique.
Tell the EMS personnel that you are a first aider
and give a full report of what has happened.
However, do not stop CPR while you are doing
this unless they tell you to do so. Listen carefully
to what they ask you to do and follow their
instructions (p.23). If you have access to an AED
(pp.84–87) and are trained to use it, you may
have already attached it to the casualty’s chest. If
not, the EMS personnel will have one and attach
it. You may be asked to continue with chest
compressions while they do this. You will be
asked to stand clear while it analyzes the
casualty’s heart rhythm (p.84). Do not approach
the casualty again until asked to do so.
VARIATIONS FOR RESCUE BREATHING
WHEN THE AMBULANCE ARRIVES
Mouth-to-nose rescue breathing
If a casualty has been rescued from the water,
or injuries to the mouth make it impossible to achieve
a good seal, you can use the mouth-to-nose method
for giving rescue breaths. With the casualty’s mouth
closed, form a tight seal with your lips around the
casualty’s nose and blow steadily into his nose. Then
allow the mouth to fall open to let the air escape.
Mouth-to-stoma rescue breathing
A casualty who has had his voice box surgically
removed breathes through an opening in the front
of the neck (a stoma), rather than through the mouth
and nose. Always check for a stoma before giving
rescue breaths. If you find a stoma, close off the
mouth and nose with one hand and then breathe
into the stoma.
Using a pocket mask
Kneel behind the casualty’s head. Open the airway and
place the mask, narrow end toward you, over the
casualty’s mouth and nose. Deliver rescue breaths
through the mouthpiece.
Using a face shield
Tilt the casualty’s head back to open the airway. Place
the shield over his face so the filter is over the mouth.
Make a seal over the entire mouth area, and give
rescue breaths through the filter.
»
70
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
Healthcare professionals and trained first aiders will deliver
CPR using chest compressions combined with rescue breaths
(pp.66–67). However, if you have not been trained in CPR or
you are unwilling or unable to give rescue breaths, chestcompression-only CPR has been shown to be of great benefit
certainly in the first minutes after the heart has stopped. The
dispatcher will give instructions for chest-compression-only
resuscitation for a collapsed casualty when advising an untrained
person by telephone. It is important to start chest compressions
as soon as possible. You should give good-quality compressions
and continue with them until emergency help arrives and takes
over, or the casualty shows signs of regaining consciousness
such as coughing, opening his eyes, speaking or moving
purposefully and starts breathing normally, or you are too
exhausted to continue.
WHAT TO DO
Check for a response.
Gently shake the casualty’s
shoulders, and talk to him or give
a command (p.62).
IF THERE IS A RESPONSE
Use the primary survey (pp.44–45)
to identify the most serious injury
and treat conditions in order
of priority.
IF THERE IS NO RESPONSE
Tell a helper to call 911 for
emergency help and to get
an AED. If you are alone,
make the call yourself, and if an
AED is nearby, retrieve and use
it (pp.84–86).
1
 ■ If there is more than one rescuer
swap every 2 minutes to prevent
fatigue. Make sure there is
minimal interruption when you
change over to maintain the
quality of the compressions.
 ■ For unconscious children and
babies who are not breathing,
it is best to give CPR using
rescue breaths with chest
compressions (pp.76–77 and
pp.82–83).
 ■ If a casualty has been rescued
from water and is not breathing,
it is best to give CPR using
rescue breaths and chest
compressions (p.100).
CHEST-COMPRESSION-ONLY CPR
«UNCONSCIOUS ADULT
CAUTION
71
UNCONSCIOUS ADULT
Kneel beside the casualty,
level with his chest. Place
one hand on the center of the
chest (p.66)—you can identify the
position through clothing. Put the
heel of your other hand on top of
the first and interlock your fingers.
Begin chest compressions:
lean over the casualty, with
your arms straight and press down
vertically on his breastbone,
depressing the chest by at least
2 in (5 cm). Release the pressure—
but do not take your hands off the
chest—and let the chest come
back up. The time taken for
compression and release should
be about the same.
Continue with compressions
at a rate of at least 100 per
minute until emergency help
arrives and takes over, or the
casualty shows signs of regaining
consciousness such as coughing,
opening his eyes, speaking or
moving purposefully and starts
breathing normally, or you are
too exhausted to continue.
2
3
4
 ■ After 2 minutes of compressiononly CPR, the body does need
oxygen, so compressions should
be combined with rescue
breathing (pp.66–69).
CAUTION
72
The following pages describe the techniques
that may be needed for the resuscitation of
an unconscious child aged between one year
and puberty.
When treating a child, always approach
and treat her from the side, kneeling down
next to the head or chest. You will then
be in the correct position to carry out all
the different stages of resuscitation:
checking responsiveness and breathing;
chest compressions; opening the airway; and
giving rescue breaths (together called
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, or CPR).
At each stage you will have decisions to make; for
example, is the child breathing? The steps given
here tell you what to do next. The first priority is
to determine responsiveness and to assess
breathing. If the casualty is not responsive and
not breathing or just gasping, you must begin
chest compressions. If the casualty is breathing,
place in the recovery position (pp.74–75).
If a child with a known heart condition
collapses, call 911 for emergency help
immediately and ask for an AED to be brought
(pp.84–87). Early access to advanced care can
be life-saving.
On discovering a collapsed child, you
should first establish whether she is conscious
or unconscious. Do this by speaking loudly
and clearly to the child. Ask “What
happened?” or give a command such as,
“Open your eyes.” Place one hand on her
shoulder, and gently tap her to see if there
is a response.
HOW TO CHECK RESPONSE
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
If there is no further danger, leave the
child in the position in which she was found;
check for life-threatening injuries and summon
emergency help if needed.
Treat any condition found. Monitor and record
vital signs—level of response, breathing, and
pulse (pp.52–53)—until emergency help arrives or
the child recovers.
Shout for help. Leave the child in the position in
which she was found, and assess for breathing.
If you are unable to assess for breathing
in the position in which she was found,
roll the child onto her back using the log-roll
technique (p.159).
2
1
1
2
IF THERE IS A RESPONSE
IF THERE IS NO RESPONSE
UNCONSCIOUS CHILD (ONE YEAR TO PUBERTY)
73
In an unresponsive casualty, simply look
at her to see whether or not she is breathing
normally. Occasional gasps (agonal
breathing) do not constitute normal
breathing, and if you see this, you should
treat it as if she were not breathing at
all and begin chest compressions.
HOW TO ASSESS BREATHING
UNCONSCIOUS CHILD
IF THE CHILD IS BREATHING IF THE CHILD IS NOT BREATHING
Check for life-threatening injuries such as
severe bleeding. Treat as necessary.
Ask a helper to call 911 for emergency help
and to retrieve an AED if one is available, while
you begin CPR with chest compressions (pp.76–77). Place the child in the recovery position
(pp.74–75) and call 911 for emergency help.
Monitor and record vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)—
while waiting for help to arrive.
If you are alone, perform chest compressions
for 2 minutes and then call 911 for emergency
help yourself. Continue with CPR, alternating
cycles of 30 compressions with TWO breaths,
until help arrives.
1 1
2
3
2
»
74
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
UNCONSCIOUS CHILD
If the child is found lying on her side or
front, rather than her back, not all of these
steps will be necessary to place her in the
recovery position. If the mechanisms of
injury suggest a spinal injury, treat as on
pp.157–59.
HOW TO PLACE CHILD IN RECOVERY POSITION
Make sure that both of the child’s legs are
straight. Place the arm nearest to you at right
angles to the child’s body, with the elbow bent and
the palm facing upward.
Bring the arm that is farthest from you across
the child’s chest, and hold the back of her hand
against the cheek nearest to you. With your other
hand, grasp the far leg just above the knee and pull
it up, keeping the foot flat on the ground.
Kneel beside the child. Remove her glasses and
any bulky objects from her pockets, but do not
search pockets for small items.
1
2
3
WHAT TO DO
Keeping the child’s hand pressed against her
cheek, pull on the far leg and roll the child
toward you and onto her side.
4
«
75
UNCONSCIOUS CHILD
Adjust the upper leg so that both the hip and
the knee are bent at right angles. Tilt the child’s
head back and lift the chin so that the airway
remains open.
If necessary, adjust the hand under the cheek
to make sure that the head remains tilted and
the airway stays open. If it has not already been
done, call 911 for emergency help. Monitor and
record vital signs—level of response, breathing, and
pulse (pp.52–53)—until help arrives.
If the child has to be left in the recovery
position for longer than 30 minutes, you
should roll her onto her back, then turn her
onto the opposite side—unless other injuries
prevent you from doing this.
6
7
If you suspect a spinal injury (pp.157–59) and need
to place her in the recovery position, try to keep
the spine straight using the following guidelines:
 ■ If you are alone, use the technique shown below.
 ■ If there are two of you, one person should steady the
head while the other turns the child.
 ■ If there are three of you, one person should steady
the head while one person turns the child. The third
person should keep the child’s back straight during
the maneuver.
 ■ If there are four or more people in total, use the
log-roll technique (p.159).
»
5 SPECIAL CASE RECOVERY POSITION FOR
SUSPECTED SPINAL INJURY
76
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
WHAT TO DO
Determine unresponsiveness and assess
breathing (not just gasping).
Kneel level with the child’s chest. Place one
hand on the center of her chest. This is the
point at which you will apply pressure.
Lean over the child, with your arm straight,
and then press down vertically on the
breastbone with the heel of your hand. Depress
the chest by at least one-third of its depth—
about 2 in (5 cm). Release the pressure without
removing your hand. Allow the chest to come
back up completely (recoil) before you give the
next compression. Compress the chest 30 times,
at a rate of at least 100 compressions per
minute. The time taken for compression and
release should be about the same.
Open and assess the airway. Pick out any
visible obstructions from the mouth. Do
not sweep the mouth with your finger to look
for obstructions.
1 2
3 4
«UNCONSCIOUS CHILD
HOW TO GIVE CPR
77
UNCONSCIOUS CHILD
If there are two rescuers, one should immediately
call 911 while the other begins CPR. They can switch
every two minutes.
Pinch the soft part of the child’s nose with
the finger and thumb of the hand that was
on the forehead. Make sure that her nostrils are
closed to prevent air from escaping. Allow her
mouth to fall open.
If you are alone, perform chest-compressiononly CPR or CPR using cycles of 30
compressions followed by TWO rescue breaths,
for two minutes, then stop to call 911 for
emergency help. Continue CPR until emergency
help takes over, the child starts to breathe normally,
or you become too exhausted to continue.
Take a deep breath in before placing your
lips around the child’s mouth, making sure
that you form an airtight seal. Blow steadily
into the child’s mouth for one second; the chest
should rise. Maintaining head tilt and chin lift, take your
mouth off the child’s mouth and look to see
the chest fall. If the chest rises visibly as you blow
and falls fully when you lift your mouth, you have
given a rescue breath. If the chest does not rise
you may need to adjust the head (p.78). Give
TWO rescue breaths.
8
6
7
5
Place one hand on the child’s breastbone as
indicated here. Make sure that you do not apply
pressure over the child’s ribs, the lower tip of
the breastbone (the xiphoid process) or the
upper abdomen.
Hand position
Ribs
Breastbone
Lower tip of
breastbone
Upper
abdomen
»
HAND POSITION
CAUTION
78
There are circumstances when it may be
difficult to deliver CPR. While it is better to give
a combination of rescue breaths and chest
compressions, you may not have been formally
trained in CPR or you may be unwilling or
unable to give rescue breaths. In this situation
you can give chest compressions only. When
you call 911, the dispatcher will give instructions
for chest-compression only CPR.
 ■ If there is more than one rescuer, change
over every 2 minutes, with minimal
interruption to compressions.
 ■ If the child vomits during CPR, roll her away
from you onto her side, ensuring that her
head is turned toward the floor to allow
vomit to drain away. Clear the mouth, then
immediately roll her onto her back again
and recommence CPR.
 ■ If the child is large, or the rescuer is small, you
can give chest compressions using both hands,
as for an adult casualty (pp.66–67). Place one
hand on the chest, cover it with your other
hand, and interlock your fingers.
If a child’s chest does not rise when you are
giving rescue breaths:
 ■ Recheck the head tilt and chin lift
 ■ Recheck the mouth. Remove any obvious
obstructions, but do not do a finger sweep of
the mouth
Make no more than two attempts to achieve
rescue breaths before repeating the chest
compressions.
PROBLEMS WITH RESCUE BREATHING
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CPR
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
GIVING CHEST-COMPRESSION-ONLY CPR
Kneel beside the child, level with her chest.
Place the heel of one hand on the center of
her chest.
Lean over the child with your arm straight and
depress the chest by at least one third of the
depth, about 2 in (5 cm), and release the pressure
(but do not remove your hand).
Repeat compressions at a rate of at least 100
per minute until help arrives or the child shows
signs of regaining consciousness, such as coughing,
opening her eyes, speaking, or moving purposefully
and starts to breathe normally, or you are too
exhausted to continue.
2
3
1
«UNCONSCIOUS CHILD ONE YEAR TO PUBERTY
79
There are some cases where mouth-to-mouth
rescue breaths are not appropriate and you will
need to use a mouth-to-nose technique.
FACE SHIELDS AND POCKET MASKS
A face shield is a plastic barrier with a filter that
is placed over the casualty’s mouth. A pocket
mask is more substantial and has a valve
through which breaths are given. If you know
how to use one of these aids, carry it with you
and use it if you need to resuscitate a child.
Tell the EMS personnel that you are a first aider
and give a full report of what has happened.
However, do not stop CPR while you are doing
this unless they tell you to do so. Listen carefully
to what they ask you to do and follow their
instructions (p.23). If you have access to an AED
(pp.84–87) and are trained to use it, you may
have already attached it to the casualty’s chest. If
not, the EMS personnel will have one and attach
it. You may be asked to continue with chest
compressions while they do this. You will be
asked to stand clear while it analyzes the
casualty’s heart rhythm (p.84). Do not approach
the casualty again until asked to do so.
VARIATIONS FOR RESCUE BREATHING
WHEN THE AMBULANCE ARRIVES
Mouth-to-nose rescue breathing
If injuries to the mouth make it impossible to achieve
a good seal, you can use the mouth-to-nose method
for giving rescue breaths. With the child’s mouth
closed, form a tight seal with your lips around the
nose and blow steadily into the casualty’s nose. Then
allow the mouth to fall open to let the air escape.
Using a pocket mask
Kneel behind the child’s head. Open the airway and
place the mask over the child’s mouth and nose. If it is
an adult-size mask, position it so that the small end is
over the nose. Deliver breaths through the mouthpiece.
Using a face shield
Tilt the child’s head back to open the airway and lift
the chin. Place the plastic shield over the child’s face
so the filter is over her mouth. Pinch the nose, cover
the child's mouth completely, and deliver breaths.
UNCONSCIOUS CHILD
80
UNCONSCIOUS INFANT UNDER ONE YEAR
The following pages describe techniques that
may be used for the resuscitation of an
unconscious infant under one year. For a
child over the age of one year, use the child
resuscitation procedure (pp.72–79).
Always treat the infant from the side, the
correct position for doing all the stages of
resuscitation: giving chest compressions,
opening the airway, and giving rescue
breaths (which are together known as
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, or CPR).
First check responsiveness and assess for
breathing; if absent, give compressions
immediately. If normal breathing resumes
at any stage, hold the infant in the recovery
position (opposite). Call 911 for emergency
help if any infant who becomes unconscious.
Gently tap or flick the sole of the infant’s foot
and call his name to see if he responds. Never
shake an infant.
HOW TO CHECK RESPONSE
HOW TO OPEN THE AIRWAY
IF THERE IS NO RESPONSE
Shout for help, then start chest compressions
(pp.82–83).
IF THERE IS A RESPONSE
Check and treat for life-threatening injuries. Take the
infant with you to summon help if needed. Monitor
and record vital signs—level of response, breathing,
and pulse (pp.52–53)—until help arrives.
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
Place one fingertip of your other hand on the
point of the chin. Gently lift the point of the
chin. Do not push on the soft tissues under the chin
because this may block the airway.
Place a rolled-up towel under the infant’s
shoulders. Place one hand on the infant’s
forehead and very gently tilt the head back.
2
1
81
Keep the airway open and check if the infant
is breathing normally. Occasional gasps
(agonal breathing, p.59) do not constitute
normal breathing, and if you see this,
you should treat as if the infant were
not breathing at all.
HOW TO ASSESS FOR BREATHING
HOW TO HOLD IN RECOVERY POSITION
IF THE INFANT IS NOT BREATHING IF THE INFANT IS BREATHING
UNCONSCIOUS INFANT
Check for life-threatening injuries, such as
severe bleeding, and treat if necessary.
Hold the infant in the recovery position.
Monitor and record vital signs—level
of response, breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)—
regularly until help arrives.
Ask a helper to call 911 for emergency help.
If you are on your own, perform CPR for two
minutes before making the call yourself.
Begin CPR with 30 compressions (pp.82–83). 2
1 1
2
Cradle the infant in your arms with his head
tilted downward. This position prevents him
from choking on his tongue or from inhaling vomit.
Monitor and record vital signs—level of
response, breathing and pulse (pp.52–53)
—until help arrives.
2
1
»
82
If you cannot achieve breaths:
 ■ Recheck the head tilt and chin lift;
 ■ Recheck the infant’s mouth and nose and remove
obvious obstructions. Do not do a finger sweep;
 ■ Check that you have a firm seal around the mouth
and nose
 ■ Make up to two attempts to achieve rescue breaths,
then continue chest compressions.
 ■ If the infant vomits during the CPR, roll him away from
you onto his side to allow the vomit to drain. Resume
CPR as soon as possible
WHAT TO DO
Place the infant on his back on a flat
surface, at waist height in front of you or
on the floor, with a rolled-up towel under
his shoulders.
Open the airway by putting one hand on the
infant's forehead and a fingertip of the other
hand under the tip of his chin and tilting up and
back as shown.
Pick out any visible obstructions from mouth
and nose. Do not sweep the mouth with your
finger looking for obstructions; this could push an
object farther down.
1 3
4
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
«UNCONSCIOUS INFANT UNDER ONE YEAR
HOW TO GIVE CPR
CAUTION
Place two fingertips of your lower hand on the
center of the infant’s chest. Press down
vertically on the infant’s breastbone and depress
the chest by at least one-third of its depth—about
1½ in (4 cm). Release the pressure without losing
the contact between your fingers and the
breastbone. Repeat to give 30 compressions at a
rate of at least 100 times per minute.
2
83
Take a breath. Place your lips around the
infant’s mouth and nose to form an airtight
seal. If you cannot make a seal around the mouth
and nose, close the infant’s mouth and make a seal
around the nose only. Blow steadily into the
infant’s mouth for one second; the chest should
rise. Release your mouth and watch to see that
the chest falls. Give a second breath.
5
UNCONSCIOUS INFANT
Place your fingers on the breastbone as indicated
here. Make sure that you do not apply pressure
over the ribs, the lower tip of the infant’s
breastbone or the upper abdomen.
Finger position Breastbone
Lower tip of
breastbone Upper
abdomen
Ribs
While it is better to give a combination of rescue
breaths and chest compressions, if you have not
had formal training in CPR, or if you are unwilling
or unable to give rescue breaths, you can give
chest compressions only. The dispatcher will give
you instructions for chest-compression-only CPR.
CHEST-COMPRESSION-ONLY CPR
With more than one rescuer, change every 2
minutes with minimal interruption to compressions.
CAUTION
HAND POSITION
If you are on your own, continue alternating
30 chest compressions with TWO rescue
breaths for two minutes, then stop to call 911 for
emergency help. If help is on the way, continue
CPR until emergency help arrives and takes over,
the infant starts to breathe normally, or you
become too exhausted to continue.
6
84
HOW TO USE AN AED
When the heart stops, a cardiac arrest has occurred. The most
common cause is an abnormal rhythm of the heart, known as
ventricular fibrillation. This abnormal rhythm can occur when the
heart muscle is damaged as a result of a heart attack or when
insufficient oxygen reaches the heart. A machine called an
automated external defibrillator (AED) can be used to correct the
heart rhythm by giving an electric shock. Ideally, pediatric pads
should be used for children up to the age of 8, but adult pads can
be used if the pediatric ones are not available. AEDs are available
in many public places, including shopping centers, railroad
stations, and airports. The machine analyzes the casualty’s heart
rhythm and shows or tells you what action to take at each stage.
In most cases when an AED is called for, you will have started
CPR. When the AED is brought, continue with CPR while the
machine is prepared and the pads are attached to the casualty.
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
 ■ Make sure that no one is
touching the casualty because
this will interfere with the AED
readings and there is a risk of
electric shock.
 ■ Do not turn off the AED or
remove the pads at any point,
even if the casualty appears to
have recovered.
 ■ It does not matter if the AED
pads are reversed. If you put
them on the wrong way, do not
remove and replace them; it
wastes time and the pads may
not stick to the chest properly
when they are reattached.
The AED will start analyzing
the heart rhythm. Make sure
that no one is touching the
casualty. Follow the oral and/or
visual prompts given by the
machine (opposite).
4
WHAT TO DO
1 2 Switch on the AED and take the pads out of
the sealed pack. Remove or cut through
clothing and wipe away sweat from the chest.
Remove the backing paper and attach the pads
to the casualty’s chest in the positions
indicated. Place the first pad on the casualty’s
upper right side, just below his collarbone.
Place the second pad on the
casualty’s left side, just
below his armpit (inset above).
Make sure the pad has its long
axis along the head-to-toe axis of
the casualty’s body.
3
CAUTION
85
The AED will start to give you a series of
visual and verbal prompts as soon as it is
switched on. There are several different AED
models available, each of which has voice
prompts. You should always follow
the prompts given by the AED that you
are using until advanced emergency care
is available.
SEQUENCE OF AED INSTRUCTIONS
HOW TO USE AN AED
 ■ Switch on the AED.
 ■ Attach pads to casualty’s chest.
The AED reanalyzes heart rhythm.
The AED reanalyzes heart rhythm.
 ■ If the casualty shows signs of regaining
consciousness, such as coughing, opening his
eyes, speaking, or moving purposefully, and
starts to breathe normally, place him in the
recovery position (pp.64–65). Leave the AED
attached to the casualty.
AED advises that a shock is needed.
The machine charges up.
AED instructs you to deliver the shock.
 ■ Make sure everyone is clear of the casualty.
 ■ Depending on the type of AED, it will either
deliver the shock automatically or instruct you
to push the shock button. The casualty may
appear to “jump” with each shock; this is quite
normal.
AED instructs you to continue CPR for two
minutes before it reanalyzes heart rhythm.
AED instructs you to continue CPR for two
minutes before it reanalyzes heart rhythm.
AED advises that no shock is needed.
 AED gets ready to analyze the casualty’s heart rhythm. It may state “Stand
clear, analyzing now” or “Analyzing.” Make sure that no one is touching
the casualty.
Is a shock advised?
»
YES NO
86
The use of an AED is occasionally complicated by underlying
medical conditions, external factors, clothing, or the cause of
the cardiac arrest. The safety of all concerned should always be
your first consideration.
CLOTHING AND JEWELRY
Any clothing or jewelry that could interfere with
pads should be removed or cut away. Normal
amounts of chest hair are not a problem, but if
it prevents good contact between the skin and
the pads, it should be shaved off. Ensure that
any metal is removed from the area where the
pads will be attached. Remove clothing
containing metal, such as an underwire bra.
EXTERNAL FACTORS
Water or excessive sweat on the chest can
reduce the effectiveness of the shock so
the chest should be dry. If a casualty is rescued
from water (p.36), dry the chest before applying
the AED pads.
If the casualty is unconscious following an
electric shock, start CPR immediately after
the contact with electricity is broken.
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
Some casualties with heart conditions have a
pacemaker or an implantable cardioverter
defibrillator (ICD). This should not stop you
from using an AED. However, if you can see
or feel a device under the chest skin, do
not place the pad directly over it. If a casualty
has a patch such as a nitroglycerin patch
on the chest, remove it before you apply
the AED.
PREGNANT CASUALTIES
There are no contraindications to using
an AED during pregnancy; however, the
increased breast size may present some
problems. Therefore, to place the AED pads
correctly, you may need to move one or both
breasts. This must be carried out with respect
and dignity.
CONSIDERATIONS WHEN USING AN AED
THE UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
«HOW TO USE AN AED
87
Standard adult AEDs can be used on children over the age of
eight years. For children between the ages of one and eight, the
smaller-sized, pediatric pads are preferred if they are available. If
not, a standard AED and adult pads can be used.
When the emergency services arrive continue
to resuscitate the child until they take over from
you. They need to know:
 ■ Casualty’s present status; for example,
unconscious and not breathing
 ■ Number of shocks you have delivered
 ■ When the casualty collapsed and the length
of time he has been unconscious
 ■ Any relevant history, if known
If the casualty recovers at any point, leave the
AED pads attached to his chest. Ensure that any
used materials from the AED cabinet are
disposed of as clinical waste (p.238). Inform the
relevant person what has been taken out of the
cabinet because it will need to be replaced.
POSITIONING AED PADS ON CHILDREN
HANDING OVER TO THE EMERGENCY SERVICES
Positioning pediatric AED pads
Place one pad in the center of the child’s back. Then
place the second pad over the center of the child’s
chest. Make sure both pads are vertical. Connect the
pads to the AED and proceed as described on p.85.
Using AED pads on a larger child
Place the pads on the child’s chest as for an adult—
one on the child’s upper right side, just below his
collarbone, and the second pad on the child’s left side,
just below the armpit. Make sure the long axis of the
pad is along the head-to-toe axis of the child’s body.
HOW TO USE AN AED
A manual defibrillator is preferred
for infants younger than one year
of age, but if none is available,
use an AED with pediatric pads.
CAUTION
Oxygen is essential to life. Every time
we inhale, air containing oxygen
enters the lungs. This oxygen is then
transferred to the blood, to be transported
around the body. Breathing and the
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide
(a waste product from body tissues) are
described as “respiration.” The structures
within the body that enable us to breathe—
the air passages and the lungs—together
make up the respiratory system, and work
with the heart and circulatory system.
Respiration can be impaired in several
different ways. The airways may be blocked,
causing choking or suffocation; the
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide in
the lungs may be affected by the inhalation
of smoke or fumes; lung function may be
impaired by chest injury; or the breathing
mechanism may be affected by conditions
such as asthma. Anxiety can also cause
breathing difficulties. Problems with
respiration can be life-threatening and
need urgent first aid.
 ■ To assess the casualty’s condition.
 ■ To identify and remove the cause of the problem and
provide fresh air.
 ■ To comfort and reassure the casualty.
 ■ To maintain an open airway, check breathing and
be prepared to resuscitate if necessary.
 ■ To obtain medical help if necessary. Call 911 for
emergency help if you suspect a serious illness
or injury.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
5
RESPIRATORY
PROBLEMS
90
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
This system comprises the mouth, nose,
windpipe (trachea), lungs, and pulmonary
blood vessels. Respiration involves the process
of breathing and the exchange of gases
(oxygen and carbon dioxide) in the lungs and
in cells throughout the body.
We inhale air to take oxygen into the
lungs, and we exhale to expel the waste gas,
carbon dioxide, which is a by-product of
respiration. When we inhale, air is drawn
through the nose and mouth into the airway
and the lungs. In the lungs, oxygen is taken
from air sacs (alveoli) into the pulmonary
capillaries. At the same time, carbon dioxide
is released from the capillaries into the
alveoli. Carbon dioxide is then expelled as
we exhale. An average man’s lungs can
hold more than 10 pints (6 liters) of air; a
woman’s lungs can hold less than 9 pints
(5 liters) of air.
Structure of the
respiratory system
The lungs form the central
part of the respiratory system.
Together with the circulatory
system, they perform the vital
function of gas exchange in order to
distribute oxygen around the body
and remove carbon dioxide.
Gas exchange in air sacs
A network of tiny blood vessels
(capillaries) surrounds each air sac
(alveolus). The thin walls of both
structures allow oxygen to diffuse into
the blood and carbon dioxide to leave it.
Epiglottis
Pulmonary
capillary
Alveolus
Larynx
Ribs surround and
protect the chest
cavity
Windpipe (trachea)
extends from the larynx
to two main bronchi
Intercostal muscles
span spaces
between ribs
Lungs are two
spongy organs that
occupy a large part
of chest cavity
Pleural membrane, which
has two layers separated
by a lubricating fluid,
surrounds and protects
each of the lungs
Diaphragm is a sheet of muscle
that separates chest and
abdominal cavities
Bronchioles are small
air passages that
branch from bronchi
and eventually open
into air sacs (alveoli)
within the lungs
Two main bronchi, one
to each lung, further
subdivide into smaller
bronchi, then
bronchioles
Bronchiole
91
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
The breathing process consists of the actions
of breathing in (inspiration) and breathing out
(expiration), followed by a pause. Pressure
differences between the lungs and the air
outside the body determine whether air is
drawn in or expelled. When the air pressure in
the lungs is lower than outside, air is drawn in;
when pressure is higher, air is expelled. The
pressure within the lungs is altered by the
movements of the two main sets of muscles
involved in breathing: the intercostal muscles
and the diaphragm.
Breathing is regulated by a group of nerve
cells in the brain called the respiratory center.
This center responds to changes in the level
of carbon dioxide in the blood. When the
level rises, the respiratory center reacts by
stimulating the intercostal muscles and the
diaphragm to contract, and a breath occurs.
Our breathing rate can be altered consciously
under normal conditions or in response
to abnormal levels of carbon dioxide, low
levels of oxygen, or with stress, exercise,
injury, or illness.
HOW BREATHING WORKS
HOW BREATHING IS CONTROLLED
Inhaling
The intercostal muscles (the muscles between the ribs)
and the diaphragm contract, causing the ribs to move
up and out, the chest cavity to expand, and the lungs to
expand to fill the space. As a result, the pressure inside
the lungs is reduced, and air is drawn into the lungs.
Exhaling
The intercostal muscles relax, and the rib cage returns
to its resting position, while the diaphragm relaxes and
resumes its domed shape. As a result, the chest cavity
becomes smaller, and pressure inside the lungs
increases. Air flows out of the lungs to be exhaled.
Lung
inflates
Lung
deflates
Intercostal muscles
between ribs contract
Ribs rise and
swing outward
Diaphragm returns to
domed position
Intercostal muscles
between ribs relax
Ribs move down
and inward
Diaphragm contracts and
moves down
92
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
HYPOXIA
SEE ALSO Anaphylactic shock p.223 | Asthma p.102 | Burns to the airway p.177 | Croup p.103 | Drowning p.100 |
Hanging and strangulation p.97 | Inhalation of fumes pp.98–99 | Penetrating chest wound pp.104–05 | Stroke pp.212–13
 In moderate and severe hypoxia,
there may be:
 ■ Rapid breathing
 ■ Breathing that is distressed or
gasping
 ■ Difficulty speaking
 ■ Gray-blue skin (cyanosis). At first,
this is more obvious in the
extremities, such as lips, nailbeds,
and earlobes, but as the hypoxia
worsens cyanosis affects the rest of
the body
 ■ Anxiety
 ■ Restlessness
 ■ Headache
 ■ Cessation of breathing if the hypoxia
is not quickly reversed
RECOGNITION This condition arises when there is insufficient oxygen in the
body tissues. There are a number of causes of hypoxia, ranging
from suffocation, choking, or poisoning to impaired lung or brain
function. The condition is accompanied by a variety of
symptoms, depending on the degree of hypoxia. If not treated
quickly, hypoxia is potentially fatal because a sufficient level of
oxygen is vital for the normal function of all the body organs and
tissues, but especially the brain.
In a healthy person, the amount of oxygen in the air is
more than adequate for the body tissues to function normally.
However, in an injured or ill person, a reduction in oxygen
reaching the tissues results in deterioration of body function.
Mild hypoxia reduces a casualty’s ability to think clearly, but
the body responds to this by increasing the rate and depth of
breathing (p.91). However, if the oxygen supply to the brain
cells is cut off for as little as three to four minutes, the brain cells
will begin to die. All the conditions covered in this chapter can
result in hypoxia.
■ Suffocation by smoke or gas ■ Changes in atmospheric pressure, for
example, at high altitude or in a depressurized aircraft
Insufficient oxygen in inspired air
INJURY OR CONDITION CAUSES
Airway obstruction
Conditions affecting
the chest wall
Impaired lung function
Damage to the brain or nerves that
control respiration
Impaired oxygen uptake by
the tissues
■ Blocking or swelling of the airway ■ Hanging or strangulation
■ Something covering the mouth and nose ■ Asthma ■ Choking
■ Anaphylaxis
■ Crushing, for example, by falling earth or sand or pressure from
a crowd ■ Chest wall injury with multiple rib fractures or constricting burns
■ Lung injury ■ Collapsed lung ■ Lung infections, such as pneumonia
■ A head injury or stroke that damages the breathing center in the brain
■ Some forms of poisoning ■ Paralysis of nerves controlling the muscles
of breathing, as in spinal cord injury
■ Carbon monoxide or cyanide poisoning ■ Shock
INJURIES OR CONDITIONS CAUSING LOW BLOOD OXYGEN (HYPOXIA)
93
HYPOXIA | AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
SEE ALSO Asthma p.102 | Burns to the airway p.177 | Choking adult p.94 | Choking child p.95 |
Choking infant p.96 | Drowning p.100 | Hanging and strangulation p.97 | Inhalation of fumes pp.98–99
The airway may be obstructed externally or internally, for
example, by an object that is stuck at the back of the throat
(pp.94–96). The main causes of obstruction are:
 ■ Inhalation of an object, such as food
 ■ Blockage by the tongue, blood, or vomit while a casualty is
unconscious (p.59)
 ■ Internal swelling of the throat occurring with burns, scalds,
stings, or anaphylaxis
 ■ Injuries to the face or jaw
 ■ An asthma attack in which the small airways in the lungs
constrict (p.102)
 ■ External pressure on the neck, as in hanging or strangulation
 ■ Peanuts, which can swell up when in contact with body fluids.
These pose a particular danger in young children because they
can completely block the airway
Try to encourage a toddler to cough up the object; an older child
can be treated with abdominal thrusts as shown on p.95. Airway
obstruction requires prompt action; be prepared to give chest
compressions and rescue breaths if the child loses consciousness
(Unconscious child, pp.76–79).
 ■ Features of hypoxia (opposite)
 ■ Difficulty speaking and breathing
 ■ Noisy breathing in partial airway
obstruction
 ■ Silence or minimal, high-pitched
sounds if complete or near complete
obstruction
 ■ Red, puffy face
 ■ Signs of distress from the casualty,
who may point to the throat or grasp
the neck
 ■ To remove the obstruction
 ■ To restore normal breathing
 ■ To arrange removal to the hospital
 ■ If the casualty is unconscious,
look for normal breathing
and, if not, begin CPR with
compressions (pp.54–87).
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
94
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
CHOKING ADULT
SEE ALSO Unconscious adult pp.62–71
WHAT TO DO
If the casualty is breathing,
encourage her to continue
coughing. If she is not coughing
and not able to breathe, she is
choking. Go to step 2.
Stand behind the casualty
with one leg back and the
other between the casualty’s
legs, and put both arms around
the upper part of her abdomen.
Clench your fist with your thumb
on top of your index finger and
place it between the navel and
the bottom of her breastbone.
Grasp your fist firmly with your
other hand. Thrust sharply
inward and upward until the
object is dislodged or the
casualty becomes unconscious.
If the obstruction still has
not cleared, continue CPR
until help arrives.
If the casualty loses
consciousness, carefully
support her to the floor,
immediately call 911 for
emergency help or send
someone to do so, then begin
CPR with chest compressions
(pp.66–67). Each time the airway
is opened during CPR, look for
an object in the casualty's mouth
and, if seen, remove it.
3
4
1 2
A foreign object that is stuck in the throat may block it and cause
laryngeal spasm. If blockage of the airway is mild, the casualty
should be able to clear it; if it is severe, she will be unable to
speak, cough, or breathe, and will eventually lose consciousness.
If she loses consciousness, the throat muscles may relax and the
airway may open enough to do rescue breathing. Be prepared to
begin chest compressions and rescue breaths.
Ask the casualty:
“Are you choking?”
Mild obstruction:
 ■ Casualty able to speak, cough, and
breathe
Severe obstruction:
 ■ Casualty unable to speak, cough or
breathe, with eventual loss of
consciousness
 ■ To remove the obstruction
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital if necessary
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ If at any stage the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing, begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.66–67) to try
to relieve the obstruction.
 ■ Any casualty who has been
given abdominal thrusts must
seek medical advice.
CAUTION
95
CHOKING ADULT | CHOKING CHILD
CHOKING CHILD ONE YEAR TO PUBERTY
 ■ To remove the obstruction
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital if necessary
Ask the child: “Are you choking?”
Mild obstruction:
 ■ Child able to speak, cough,
and breathe
Severe obstruction:
 ■ Child unable to speak, cough or
breathe, with eventual loss of
consciousness.
 ■ If the child loses consciousness
at any stage and is not
breathing, begin CPR with chest
compressions to try to relieve
the obstruction (pp.76–79).
 ■ Seek medical advice for any
child who has been given
abdominal thrusts.
Young children especially are prone to choking. A child may
choke on food, or may put small objects into her mouth and
cause a blockage of the airway.
If a child is choking, you need to act quickly. If she loses
consciousness, the throat muscles may relax and the airway may
open enough to do rescue breathing. Be prepared to begin
rescue breaths and chest compressions.
WHAT TO DO
If the child becomes
unresponsive, carefully
support her to the ground and
start CPR with chest
compressions (pp.76–77). After
30 compressions, open the
airway and look in her mouth. If
a foreign body is seen, remove it
but do not perform blind finger
sweeps. Then attempt to give
two breaths and continue with
cycles of chest compressions
and ventilations until the object
is expelled.
After two minutes, if no one
has already done so, the
obstruction still has not cleared
or the child has not regained
consciousness, call 911 for
emergency help. Then continue
CPR until help arrives.
3
4
YOUR AIMS
RECOGNITION
SEE ALSO Unconscious child pp.72–79
If the child is breathing,
encourage her to continue
coughing. If she is not coughing
and not able to breathe, she is
choking. Go to step 2.
Put your arms around the
child’s upper abdomen.
Place your fist between the
navel and the bottom of her
breastbone, and grasp it with
your other hand. Pull sharply
inward and upward until the
object is dislodged or the child
becomes unconscious.
1 2
CAUTION
96
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
CHOKING INFANT UNDER ONE YEAR
SEE ALSO Unconscious infant pp.80–83
 ■ To remove the obstruction
 ■ To arrange urgent removal to the
hospital if necessary
Mild obstruction:
 ■ Infant able to cough, but has
difficulty crying or making any
other noise
Severe obstruction:
 ■ Unable to make any noise, or
breathe, with eventual loss of
consciousness
 ■ If the infant loses consciousness
at any stage, assess breathing
(pp.80–81). If the infant is not
breathing, begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.82–83), then
open the airway and remove any
obvious foreign objects, give
two rescue breaths if possible,
and repeat compressions.
 ■ Seek medical advice for any
infant who has been given
chest compressions.
An infant is more likely to choke on food or small objects than
an adult. The infant will rapidly become distressed, and you
need to act quickly to clear any obstruction. If the infant loses
consciousness, the throat muscles may relax and the airway may
open enough to do rescue breathing. Be prepared to begin chest
compressions and rescue breaths.
WHAT TO DO
If the infant is distressed,
is unable to cry, cough, or
breathe, lay him face down along
your forearm, with his head low,
and support his back and head.
Give up to five back blows, with
the heel of your hand.
Perform up to five chest
compressions. The aim is to
relieve the obstruction with each
chest compression rather than
necessarily doing all five.
Check the infant’s mouth;
remove any obvious
obstructions with your
fingertips. Do not sweep the
mouth with your finger because
this may push the object farther
down the throat. Repeat steps
1–4 until the object clears or the
infant loses consciousness.
If the obstruction has not
cleared and he becomes
unconscious, call 911 for
emergency help, then start CPR
with chest compressions (pp.82–
83). Continue until help arrives.
3
2
1
4
5
YOUR AIMS
RECOGNITION
If back blows fail to clear the
obstruction, turn the infant
onto his back and give chest
compressions. Using two fingers,
push against the infant’s
breastbone, in the nipple line.
CAUTION
97
CHOKING INFANT | HANGING AND STRANGULATION
HANGING AND STRANGULATION
SEE ALSO Spinal injury pp.157–59 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
If pressure is exerted on the outside of the neck, the airway
is squeezed and the flow of air to the lungs is cut off. The main
causes of such pressure are:
 ■ Hanging—suspension of the body by a noose around
the neck;
 ■ Strangulation—constriction or squeezing around the neck
or throat.
Sometimes, hanging or strangulation may occur accidentally—
for example, by ties or clothing becoming caught in machinery.
Hanging may cause a broken neck; for this reason, a casualty in
this situation must be handled extremely carefully.
 ■ A constricting article around
the neck
 ■ Marks around the casualty’s neck
 ■ Rapid, difficult breathing; impaired
consciousness; gray–blue skin
(cyanosis)
 ■ Congestion of the face, with
prominent veins: may have tiny red
spots on the face or eyelids, or red
areas in the whites of the eyes
 ■ To restore adequate breathing
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
 ■ Do not move the casualty
unnecessarily, in case of
spinal injury.
 ■ Once you have removed any
constricting material, save it
for the police, who may need
it as evidence.
 ■ If the casualty is unconscious,
look for normal breathing
and, if not, begin CPR with
compressions (pp.54–87).
WHAT TO DO
If the casualty is hanging,
support the body while you
relieve the constriction. Be
aware that the body will be very
heavy if he is unconscious.
Quickly remove any
constriction from around
the casualty’s neck.
Call 911 for emergency
help, even if he appears
to recover fully. Monitor and
record his vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—until help arrives.
If conscious, help the
casualty to lie down while
you support his head and neck.
4
3
2
1
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
98
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
INHALATION OF FUMES
The inhalation of smoke, gases (such as
carbon monoxide), or toxic vapors can be
lethal. A casualty who has inhaled fumes is
likely to have low levels of oxygen in his body
tissues (hypoxia, p.92) and therefore needs
urgent medical attention. Do not attempt to
carry out a rescue if it is likely to put your
own life at risk; fumes that have built up in a
confined space will quickly overcome anyone
who is not wearing protective equipment.
SMOKE INHALATION
Any person who has been enclosed in a
confined space during a fire should be assumed
to have inhaled smoke. Smoke from burning
plastics, foam padding, and synthetic wall
coverings is likely to contain poisonous
fumes. Casualties who have suffered from
fume inhalation should also be examined
for other injuries caused by the fire, such as
external burns.
INHALATION OF CARBON
MONOXIDE
Carbon monoxide is a poisonous gas that is
hard to detect because it has no taste or smell.
The gas acts directly on red blood cells,
preventing them from carrying oxygen to the
body tissues. If carbon monoxide is inhaled in
large quantities—for example, from smoke or
vehicle exhaust fumes in a confined space—
it can very quickly prove fatal. Lengthy
exposure to even a small amount of carbon
monoxide—for example, due to a leakage of
fumes from a defective heater or flue—may
also prove fatal.
■ Exhaust fumes of motor vehicles ■ Smoke
from most fires ■ Back-drafts from blocked
chimney flues ■ Emissions from defective gas
or kerosene heaters and poorly maintained
heaters ■ Disposable or portable barbeques
used in a confined space
Prolonged exposure to low levels:
■ Headache ■ Confusion ■ Aggression ■ Nausea
and vomiting ■ Incontinence
Brief exposure to high levels:
■ Gray-blue skin coloration ■ Rapid, difficult breathing
■ Impaired consciousness, leading to unconsciousness
Carbon
monoxide
FUMES SOURCE EFFECTS
Smoke
Carbon
dioxide
Solvents
and fuels
■ Tends to accumulate and become dangerously
concentrated in deep enclosed spaces, such as
coal pits, wells, and underground tanks
■ Fires: smoke is a bigger killer than fire itself.
Smoke is low in oxygen (which is used up by the
burning of the fire) and may contain toxic fumes
from burning materials
■ Breathlessness ■ Headache ■ Confusion
■ Unconsciousness
■ Rapid, noisy, and difficult breathing ■ Coughing
and wheezing ■ Burning in the nose or mouth ■ Soot
around the mouth and nose ■ Unconsciousness
■ Glues ■ Cleaning fluids ■ Lighter fuels
■ Camping gas and propane-fueled stoves
(Solvent abusers may use a plastic bag to
concentrate the vapor, especially with glues)
■ Headache and vomiting ■ Impaired consciousness
■ Airway obstruction from using a plastic bag or from
choking on vomit may result in death ■ Solvent abuse
is a potential cause of cardiac arrest
EFFECTS OF FUME INHALATION
99
INHALATION OF FUMES
WHAT TO DO
Call 911 for emergency
help. Tell the dispatcher
that you suspect fume
inhalation.
Stay with the casualty until
help arrives. Monitor and
record the casualty’s vital signs—
level of response, breathing,
and pulse (pp.52–53)—until
help arrives.
If it is necessary to escape
from the source of the
fumes, help the casualty away
from the fumes into fresh air.
Do not enter the fume-filled
area yourself.
Support the casualty and
encourage him to breathe
normally. If the casualty’s
clothing is still burning, try to
extinguish the flames (p.33).
Treat any obvious burns
(pp.174–77) or other injuries.
2 4
1 3 ■ If the casualty is in a garage
filled with vehicle exhaust
fumes, open the doors wide
and let the gas escape before
you enter.
 ■ If the casualty is found
unconscious and is not
breathing normally,
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
 ■ To restore adequate breathing
 ■ To call 911 for emergency help and
obtain urgent medical attention
YOUR AIMS
SEE ALSO Burns to the airway p.177 | Fires pp.32–33 | Hypoxia p.92 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
CAUTION
100
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
DROWNING
SEE ALSO The unconscious casualty pp.54–87 | Hypothermia pp.186–88 | Water incidents p.36
Drowning can result in death from hypothermia due to
immersion in cold water, sudden cardiac arrest due to cold water,
spasm of the throat blocking the airway and/or inhalation of
water and consequent airway obstruction.
A casualty rescued from a drowning incident should always
receive medical attention even if he seems to have recovered at
the time. Any water entering the lungs causes them to become
irritated, and the air passages may begin to swell several hours
later—a condition known as secondary drowning. The casualty
may also need to be treated for hypothermia (pp.186–88).
 ■ To restore adequate breathing
 ■ To keep the casualty warm
 ■ To arrange urgent removal to the
hospital
 ■ If the casualty loses consciousness
and is not breathing normally,
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87). If
you are alone, give CPR for two
minutes before you call for
emergency help.
 ■ If you have not had training in
CPR, or you are unable or
unwilling to give rescue breaths,
you may give chest compressions
only at a rate of at least 100
compressions per minute (pp.70–
71). If you call 911, the dispatcher
will give you instructions for
compression-only CPR.
YOUR AIMS
WHAT TO DO
If you have rescued the casualty from the
water, help him lie down on a rug or coat with
his head lower than the rest of the body so that
water can drain from his mouth. This reduces the risk
of inhaling water (p.36).
Treat the casualty for hypothermia; replace wet
clothing with dry clothes if possible and cover
him with dry blankets or coats. If the casualty
is fully conscious, give him a warm drink.
2
1
If the casualty is unconscious and you are on
your own, give CPR for two minutes before
you call 911 for emergency help.
4
If an unconscious casualty starts to breathe,
treat him for hypothermia by covering him
with warm clothes and blankets. If he recovers,
replace his wet clothes with dry ones if possible
and cover him with warm clothes and blankets.
Monitor and record vital signs—breathing, pulse
and level of response (pp.52–53)—until help arrives.
5
Call 911 for emergency help even if he
appears to recover fully because of the risk of
secondary drowning. Monitor and record his vital
signs—level of response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—until help arrives.
3
CAUTION
101
DROWNING | HYPERVENTILATION
HYPERVENTILATION
WHAT TO DO
When speaking to the casualty, be firm, but kind and reassuring.
If possible, lead the casualty away to a quiet place where she may
be able to regain control of her breathing more easily and quickly. If
this is not possible, ask any bystanders to leave.
Encourage the casualty to seek medical advice on preventing and
controlling panic attacks in the future. 2
1
This is commonly a manifestation of acute anxiety and
may accompany a panic attack. It may occur in individuals who
have recently experienced an emotional upset or those with a
history of panic attacks.
The unnaturally fast or deep breathing of hyperventilation
causes an increased loss of carbon dioxide from the blood, which
leads to chemical changes within the blood. These changes result
in symptoms such as dizziness, and trembling, as well as tingling
in the hands. As breathing returns to normal, these symptoms
will gradually subside.
 ■ Do not advise the casualty to
rebreathe her own air from a
paper bag because this may
aggravate a more serious illness.
 ■ Hyperventilation due to acute
anxiety is rare in children. Look
for other causes.
 ■ Be aware that serious illness
may also cause rapid breathing
and anxiety.
 ■ Unnaturally fast breathing
 ■ Fast pulse rate
 ■ Apprehension
There may also be:
 ■ Attention-seeking behavior
 ■ Dizziness or faintness
 ■ Trembling, sweating, and dry mouth,
or marked tingling in the hands
 ■ Tingling and cramps in the hands and
feet and around the mouth
 ■ To remove the casualty from the
cause of distress
 ■ To reassure the casualty and calm
her down
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
102
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
ASTHMA
In an asthma attack, the muscles of the air passages in
the lungs go into spasm. As a result, the airways become
narrowed, which makes breathing difficult.
Sometimes, there is a recognized trigger for an attack, such
as an allergy, a cold, a particular drug, or cigarette smoke. At
other times, there is no obvious trigger. Many sufferers have
sudden attacks.
People with asthma may be treated, depending on the severity
of their condition, with rescue inhalers or nebulizers on a regular
basis. They can usually deal with their own attacks by using their
inhaler at the first sign of an attack, but may need help and
encouragement.
WHAT TO DO
Keep calm and reassure
the casualty. Get her to take
her usual dose of her inhaler; use a
spacer if she has one. Ask her to
breathe slowly and deeply.
Sit her down in the position
she finds most comfortable;
do not let her lie down.
A mild attack should ease in
a few minutes. If it does not,
ask the casualty to take another
dose from her inhaler.
Call 911 for emergency help
if the attack is severe and
any of the following occur: the
inhaler has no effect; the
casualty is getting worse;
breathlessness makes talking
hard; she becomes exhausted.
Help the casualty use her
inhaler as required. Monitor
her vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—until help arrives.
2
1
3
4
5
 ■ Difficulty breathing
 ■ Wheezing
 ■ Difficulty speaking, leading to short
sentences and whispering
 ■ Coughing
 ■ Distress and anxiety
 ■ Features of hypoxia (p.92), such as a
gray-blue tinge to the lips, earlobes,
and nailbeds (cyanosis)
 ■ Exhaustion in a severe attack. If
the attack worsens, the casualty
may stop breathing and lose
consciousness
 ■ If this is a first attack and the
casualty has no medication call
911 for emergency help
immediately.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing normally, begin CPR
with chest compressions
(pp.54–87).
RECOGNITION
 ■ To ease breathing
 ■ To obtain medical help
if necessary
YOUR AIMS
A spacer device can be fitted
to an asthma inhaler to help
a casualty inhale the
medication more effectively.
They are especially useful
when giving medication to
young children.
SPECIAL CASE USING A SPACER
CAUTION
103
ASTHMA | CROUP
CROUP
WHAT TO DO
Sit your child on your knee, supporting her back. Calmly reassure
the child. Try not to panic because this will only alarm her, which
is likely to make the attack worse.
If it is safe to do so, create
a steamy atmosphere. Take
the child into the bathroom and
run a hot faucet or shower, or
boil some water in the kitchen.
Keep the child away from hot
running water or steam.
Call medical help or,
if the croup is severe, call
911 for emergency help. Keep
monitoring her vital signs—
level of response, breathing,
and pulse (pp.52–53)—until
help arrives.
2
1
3
Croup can cause an attack of breathing difficulty in young
children. It is caused by a viral infection in the windpipe and larynx.
Although croup can be alarming, it usually passes without lasting
harm. Attacks of croup usually occur at night and are made worse
if the child is crying and distressed.
If an attack of croup persists, or is severe, and accompanied by
fever, call for emergency help. There is a small risk that the child
is suffering from a rare, crouplike condition called epiglottitis, in
which the epiglottis (p.90), a small, flaplike structure in the
throat, becomes infected and swollen and may block the airway
completely. Most children are now immunized against the
bacterium that causes epiglottitis.
 ■ Distressed breathing in a young child.
There may also be:
 ■ A short, barking cough
 ■ A rasping noise, especially on
inhaling (stridor)
 ■ Croaky voice
 ■ Blue-gray skin (cyanosis)
 ■ In severe cases, the child uses
muscles around the nose, neck, and
upper arms in trying to breathe
Suspect epiglottitis if:
 ■ A child is in respiratory distress and
not improving
 ■ The child has a high temperature
 ■ To comfort and support
the child
 ■ To obtain medical help
if necessary
 ■ Do not put your fingers down
the child’s throat. This can cause
the throat muscles to go into
spasm and block the airway.
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
104
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
PENETRATING CHEST WOUND
SEE ALSO Hypoxia p.92 | Shock pp.112–13 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
The heart and lungs, and the major blood vessels around
them, lie in the chest, protected by the breastbone and
the rib cage. The rib cage also extends far enough down
to protect organs such as the liver and spleen in the upper
part of the abdomen.
If a sharp object penetrates the chest wall, there may be
severe damage to the organs in the chest and the upper
abdomen and this may lead to shock. The lungs are particularly
susceptible to injury, either by being damaged themselves or
from wounds that perforate the two-layered membrane (pleura)
that surrounds and protects each lung. Air can then enter
between the membranes and exert pressure on the lung,
and the lung may collapse—a condition called pneumothorax.
Pressure around the affected lung may build up to such an
extent that it affects the uninjured lung, and the casualty
becomes increasingly breathless. In a tension pneumothorax,
this pressure buildup may prevent the heart from refilling with
blood properly, impairing the circulation and causing shock.
Sometimes, blood collects in the pleural cavity (a hemothorax)
and puts pressure on the lungs.
 ■ To seal the wound and maintain
breathing
 ■ To minimize shock
 ■ To arrange urgent removal to
the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Difficult and painful breathing,
possibly rapid, shallow, and uneven
 ■ Casualty feels acute sense of alarm
 ■ Features of hypoxia (p.92), including
gray-blue skin coloration (cyanosis)
There may also be:
 ■ Coughed-up frothy, red blood
 ■ A crackling feeling of the skin around
the site of the wound, caused by air
collecting in the tissues
 ■ Blood bubbling out of the wound
 ■ Sound of air being sucked into the
chest as the casualty inhales
 ■ Veins in the neck becoming
prominent
RECOGNITION
Pleural
membranes
Pressure
balance
Lung
pulled
out
Pressure
balance
maintained
Chest wall
pulled out
Pooled blood in
pleural cavity
Normal breathing
The lungs inflate by being pulled out as they “suck”
onto the chest wall. Pressure is maintained within
the fluid-filled pleural space.
Collapsed (right) lung
Air from the right lung enters the surrounding
pleural space and changes the pressure balance.
The lung shrinks away from the chest wall.
Pleural space
Entry
of air
Rupture
site
Rib
Air enters
lung
Bronchus Lung collapses
inward
105
PENETRATRATING CHEST WOUND
If the casualty is unconscious, assess
for normal breathing. If absent,
begin CPR with chest compressions
(pp.54–87). If you need to place a
breathing casualty in the recovery
position, roll him onto his injured
side to help the healthy lung work
effectively (p.64).
Cover the wound and
surrounding area with
a plastic bag or foil. Secure
firmly with adhesive tape on
four sides but leave one lower
corner untaped.
Help the casualty sit down.
Encourage him to lean
toward the injured side and
cover the wound with the palm
of his hand.
Call 911 for emergency
help. While waiting for help,
continue to support the casualty
in the same position as long as
he remains conscious.
Monitor and record the
casualty’s vital signs—level
of response, breathing, and
pulse (pp.52–53)—until
emergency help arrives.
2
1
3
4
WHAT TO DO
SPECIAL CASE IF THE CASUALTY IS UNCONSCIOUS
The heart and blood vessels are
collectively known as the circulatory
(cardiovascular) system. This system keeps
the body supplied with blood, which carries
oxygen and nutrients to all body tissues.
The circulatory system may be disrupted by
either severe internal or external bleeding
or fluid loss, for example from burns
(pp.174–79). The techniques described in
this section show how you can help
maintain an adequate blood supply to the
heart and brain following injury or illness
affecting the circulatory system.
A break in the skin or the internal body
surfaces is known as a wound. Wounds can
be daunting, particularly if there is a lot of
bleeding, but prompt action reduces the
amount of blood loss and minimizes shock.
Treatments for all circulatory conditions and
types of wounds are covered in this chapter.
 ■ To assess the casualty’s condition quickly and calmly.
 ■ To control blood loss by applying pressure and
elevating the injured part.
 ■ To minimize the risk of shock.
 ■ To comfort and reassure the casualty.
 ■ To call 911 for emergency help if you suspect a
serious injury or illness.
 ■ To be aware of your own needs, including the need to
protect yourself against blood-borne infections.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
6
WOUNDS AND
CIRCULATION
108
THE HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS
KEY
The heart and the blood vessels make up the
circulatory system. These structures supply the
body with a constant flow of blood, which
brings oxygen and nutrients to the tissues and
carries waste products away.
Blood is pumped around the body by
rhythmic contractions (beats) of the heart
muscle. The blood runs through a network
of vessels, divided into three types: arteries,
veins, and capillaries. The force that is
exerted by the blood flow through the main
arteries is called blood pressure. The pressure
varies with the strength and phase of the
heartbeat, the elasticity of the arterial
walls, and the volume and thickness
of the blood.
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION
How blood circulates
Oxygenated blood passes
from the lungs to the heart,
then travels to body tissues via the
arteries. Blood that has given up its
oxygen (deoxygenated blood) returns
to the heart through the veins.
Capillary networks
A network of fine blood vessels
(capillaries) links arteries and veins within
body tissues. Oxygen and nutrients pass
from the blood into the tissues; waste
products pass from the tissues into the
blood, through capillaries. The heart
This muscular organ pumps blood
around the body and then to the
lungs to pick up oxygen. Coronary
blood vessels supply the heart
muscle with oxygen and nutrients.
Carotid artery
Brachial vein
Jugular vein
Aorta
Heart
muscle
Superior
vena cava
Coronary
artery
Inferior
vena cava
Capillary
Small artery
(arteriole)
Small vein
(venule)
Radial vein
Femoral vein
Pulmonary arteries carry
deoxygenated blood to
lungs
Pulmonary veins carry
oxygenated blood from
lungs to heart
Heart pumps blood around
body
Vena cava carries
deoxygenated blood from
body tissues to heart
Brachial artery
Radial artery
Femoral artery
Aorta carries oxygenated
blood to body tissues
Pulmonary
artery
Vessels carrying oxygenated blood
Vessels carrying deoxygenated blood
109
KEY
The heart pumps blood by muscular
contractions called heartbeats, which are
controlled by electrical impulses generated
in the heart. Each beat has three phases:
diastole, when the blood enters the heart; atrial
systole, when it is squeezed out of the atria
(collecting chambers); and ventricular systole,
when blood leaves the heart.
In diastole, the heart relaxes. Oxygenated
blood from the lungs flows through the
pulmonary veins into the left atrium. Blood that
has given up its oxygen to body tissues
(deoxygenated blood) flows from the venae
cavae (large veins that enter the heart) into the
right atrium.
In atrial systole, the two atria contract and
the valves between the atria and the ventricles
(pumping chambers) open so that blood flows
into the ventricles.
During ventricular systole, the ventricles
contract. The thick-walled left ventricle forces
blood into the aorta (main artery), which carries
it to the rest of the body. The right ventricle
pumps blood into the pulmonary arteries, which
carry it to the lungs to collect more oxygen.
HOW THE HEART FUNCTIONS
THE HEART AND BLOOD VESSELS
Blood flow through the heart
The heart’s right side pumps deoxygenated blood from
the body to the lungs. The left side pumps oxygenated
blood to the body via the aorta.
The blood cells
Red blood cells contain hemoglobin,
a red pigment that enables the cells
to carry oxygen. White blood cells
play a role in defending the body
against infection. Platelets help
blood clot.
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Valve
Left
ventricle
White blood cell
Platelet
Left atrium
Ascending aorta carries
blood to upper body
Superior vena
cava carries
blood from
upper body
Inferior vena
cava carries
blood from
lower body
Descending aorta carries
blood to lower body
Pulmonary arteries
carry deoxygenated
blood to lungs
Red blood cell
There are about 10 pints (5 liters), or 1 pint
per 14 pounds of body weight (1 liter per
13 kg), of blood in the average adult body.
Roughly 55 percent of the blood is clear yellow
fluid (plasma). In this fluid are suspended the
red and white blood cells and the platelets, all of
which make up the remaining 45 percent.
COMPOSITION OF BLOOD
Vessels carrying oxygenated blood
Vessels carrying deoxygenated blood
110
BLEEDING AND TYPES OF WOUND
When a blood vessel is damaged, the vessel
constricts, and a series of chemical reactions
occur to form a blood clot—a “plug” over the
damaged area (below). If large blood vessels are
torn or severed, uncontrolled blood loss may
occur before clotting can take place, and shock
(pp.112–13) may develop.
TYPES OF BLEEDING
Bleeding (hemorrhage) is characterized by
the type of blood vessel that is damaged.
Arteries carry oxygenated blood under
pressure from the heart. If an artery is
damaged, bleeding will be profuse. Blood will
spurt out with each heartbeat. If a main artery
is severed, the volume of circulating blood will
fall rapidly.
Blood from veins, having given up its oxygen
into the tissues, is darker red. It is under less
pressure than arterial blood, but vein walls can
widen greatly and the blood can “pool” inside
them (varicose vein). If a large or varicose vein
is damaged, blood will gush from it profusely.
Bleeding from capillaries occurs with any
wound. At first, bleeding may be brisk, but blood
loss is usually slight. A blow may rupture
capillaries under the skin, causing bleeding into
the tissues (bruising).
When a blood vessel is severed or damaged,
it constricts (narrows) in order to prevent
excessive amounts of blood from escaping.
Injured tissue cells at the site of the wound,
together with specialized blood cells called
platelets, then trigger a series of chemical
reactions that result in the formation of a
substance that forms a mesh. This mesh traps
blood cells to make a blood clot. The clot
releases a fluid known as serum, which
contains antibodies and specialized cells;
this serum begins the process of repairing the
damaged area.
At first, the blood clot is a jellylike mass.
Fibroblast cells form a plug within the clot.
Later, this dries into a crust (scab) that seals and
protects the site of the wound until the healing
process is complete.
HOW WOUNDS HEAL
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION
Injury
At the site of injury, platelets
in the blood arrive to begin
formation of a clot. Other cells
are attracted to the site to help
with repair.
Clotting
A clot is formed by platelets
in the blood and blood-clotting
protein. Tissue-forming cells
migrate to the damaged area
to start repair.
Plugging and scabbing
A plug of fibrous tissue is formed
within the clot. The plug hardens
and forms a scab that eventually
drops off when skin beneath it
is healed.
Blood clot New tissue Site of injury
Epidermis Dermis
Plug of fibrous
tissue
Severed
blood vessel
Fibroblast
111
Wounds can be classified into a number
of different types, depending on the object
that produces the wound—such as a knife or
a bullet—and the manner in which the wound
has been inflicted.
Each of these types of wounds carries
specific risks associated with surrounding
tissue damage and infection.
TYPES OF WOUND
Simple laceration
This is caused by a clean
surface cut from a sharpedged object such as a
razor. Blood vessels are cut
straight across, so bleeding
may be profuse. Structures
such as tendons or nerves
may be damaged.
Complex Laceration
Blunt or ripping forces result in
tears or lacerations. These wounds
may bleed less than clean surface
cuts, but there may be deep tissue
damage. These lacerations are often
contaminated with germs, so the
risk of infection is high.
Puncture wound
An injury such as standing on a nail
or being pricked by a needle will
result in a puncture wound. It has a
small entry site but a deep track of
internal damage. Since germs and
dirt can be carried far into the
body, the infection risk with this
kind of wound is high.
Abrasion (scrape)
This is a superficial wound in which
the topmost layers of skin are
scraped off, leaving a raw, tender
area. Abrasions are often caused by
a sliding fall or a friction burn. They
can contain embedded foreign
particles that may cause infection.
Stab wound
This is a deep incision caused by
a long or bladed instrument,
usually a knife, penetrating the
body. Stab wounds to the trunk
must always be treated as serious
because of the danger of injury to
vital organs and life-threatening
internal bleeding.
Contusion (bruise)
A blunt blow can rupture capillaries
beneath the skin, causing blood to
leak into the tissues. This process
results in bruising. Extensive
contusion and swelling may
indicate deeper damage, such as
a fracture or an internal injury.
Gunshot wound
This type of wound is caused by a
bullet or missile being driven into
the body, causing serious internal
injury as well as infection caused
by clothing and contaminants from
the air being sucked into the
wound. It is important to note the
number of wounds.
BLEEDING AND TYPES OF WOUNDS
Entry wound
Exit wound
112
SHOCK
This is a life-threatening condition that occurs when the
circulatory system fails and vital organs such as the heart and
brain are deprived of oxygen. It requires immediate emergency
treatment. Shock can be made worse by fear and pain. Minimize
the risk of shock developing by reassuring the casualty and
making him comfortable.
The most common cause of shock is severe blood loss. If this
exceeds 2 pints (1.2 liters), shock will develop. This degree of
blood loss may result from external bleeding. It may also be
caused by: hidden bleeding from internal organs (p.116), blood
escaping into a body cavity (p.116), or bleeding from damaged
blood vessels due to a closed fracture (p.136 and p.138). Loss of
other body fluids can also result in shock. Conditions that can
cause severe fluid loss include diarrhea, vomiting, bowel
obstruction, serious burns, and blood infection.
Shock may also occur when there is sufficient blood volume
but the heart is unable to pump the blood around the body. This
can be due to severe heart disease, heart attack, or acute heart
failure (cardiogenic shock). Other causes of shock include
overwhelming infection (septic shock), severe allergic reaction
(anaphylactic shock), and spinal cord injury (neurogenic shock).
SEE ALSO Anaphylactic shock p.223 | Internal bleeding p.116 | Severe burns and scalds pp.174–75 |
Severe external bleeding pp.114–15 | Spinal injury pp.157–59 |The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
 ■ Do not allow the casualty to eat
or drink because an anesthetic
may be needed. If he complains
of thirst, moisten his lips with a
little water.
 ■ Do not leave the casualty
unattended, unless you have to
call emergency help.
 ■ Do not warm the casualty with a
hot-water bottle or other direct
sources of heat, but do cover
him with a blanket.
 ■ If the casualty is in the later
stages of pregnancy, help her lie
down leaning toward her left
side to prevent the pregnant
uterus from restricting blood
flow back to the heart.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness, assess for
normal breathing and, if absent,
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
■ Little or no effect; this is the quantity of blood normally taken when
donating blood
■ Heart and respiratory rates quicken ■ Small blood vessels in nonvital areas, such
as the skin, shut down to divert blood and oxygen to the vital organs, so the skin
may feel cool, especially at the fingers and toes ■ Anxiety is common
 Less than 11
⁄2 pints (0.75 liter)
APPROXIMATE VOLUME LOST EFFECTS ON THE BODY
1
1
⁄2–3¼ pints (0.75–1.5 liters)
3¼–4 pints (1.5–2 liters)
More than 4 pints (2 liters)
(over a third of the normal
volume in the average adult)
■ Heart and respiratory rates increase even more ■ Blood pressure drops
and the brain may not receive enough oxygen, leading to increased anxiety
and/or confusion ■ The pulse at the wrist may become undetectable
■ Heart and respiratory rates increase until the body can no longer sustain them,
at which time point they decrease, a very ominous sign that often precedes death.
■ Skin may be cool and pale. ■ The casualty is likely to be unconcious
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION
EFFECTS OF BLOOD OR FLUID LOSS
CAUTION
113
WHAT TO DO
Treat any possible cause of shock that you can detect, such
as severe bleeding (pp.114–15) or serious burns (pp.174–75).
Reassure the casualty.
Keep the casualty warm by covering his
body and legs with coats or blankets.
Monitor and record vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)—
while waiting for help to arrive.
5 6
1
Help the casualty lie down—on a rug or blanket if there is one,
because this will protect him from the cold. Raise and support his
legs above the level of his heart to improve blood supply to
the vital organs.
2
 ■ To recognize shock
 ■ To treat any obvious cause of shock
 ■ To improve the blood supply to the
brain, heart, and lungs
 ■ To arrange urgent removal to
the hospital
Initially:
 ■ A rapid pulse
 ■ Pale, cold, clammy skin
 ■ Sweating
As shock develops:
 ■ Rapid, shallow breathing
 ■ A weak, “thready” pulse
 ■ Gray-blue skin (cyanosis),
especially inside the lips. A
fingernail or earlobe, if pressed,
will not regain its color immediately
 ■ Weakness and dizziness
 ■ Nausea, and possibly vomiting
 ■ Thirst
As the brain’s oxygen supply
weakens:
 ■ Restlessness and aggressive behavior
 ■ Yawning and gasping for air
 ■ Unconsciousness
 ■ Finally, the heart will stop
SHOCK
Call 911 for emergency help.
Tell the dispatcher that you
suspect shock.
3
YOUR AIMS
RECOGNITION
Loosen tight clothing to
reduce constriction at the
neck, chest, and waist.
4
114 SEE ALSO Foreign object in a wound p.121 | Shock pp.112–13
When bleeding is severe, it can be dramatic and distressing. If
bleeding is not controlled, shock may develop and the casualty
may lose consciousness.
Bleeding from the mouth or nose may affect breathing. When
treating severe bleeding, check first whether there is an object
embedded in the wound; take care not to press directly on the
object. Do not let the casualty have anything to eat or drink
because he may need an anesthetic later.
SEVERE EXTERNAL BLEEDING
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION
 ■ To control bleeding
 ■ To prevent and minimize
the effects of shock
 ■ To minimize infection
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing normally, begin
CPR with chest compressions
(pp.54–87).
WHAT TO DO
Maintain direct pressure
on the wound to control
bleeding. Raise and support
the injured limb above the level
of the casualty’s heart to reduce
blood loss.
Help the casualty lie
down—on a rug or blanket if
there is one, because this will
protect him from the cold. Since
shock may develop (pp.112–13),
raise and support his legs so that
they are above the level of his
heart. Ask a helper to call 911 for
emergency help, and to give the
dispatcher details of the site and
extent of the bleeding.
Remove or cut clothing as necessary to expose the
wound (p.232).
3
4
1
2 Apply direct pressure over
the wound with your fingers
using a sterile dressing or clean,
gauze pad. If you do not have a
dressing, ask the casualty to apply
direct pressure himself. If there is
an object in the wound, apply
pressure on either side of the
object (opposite).
CAUTION
115
Control bleeding by pressing firmly on either
side of the embedded object to push the
edges of the wound together. Do not press directly
on the object, or try to remove it. Raise the injury
above the level of the heart.
To protect the wound, drape a piece of gauze
over the object. Build up padding on either
side, then carefully bandage over the object and
pads without pressing on the object (p.121). Check
the circulation beyond the bandage every ten
minutes (p.243). If the circulation is impaired,
loosen the bandage and reapply. Treat for shock (pp.112–13). Call 911 for
emergency help. Monitor and record vital
signs—level of response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—while waiting for help to arrive.
2
3
1
SEVERE EXTERNAL BLEEDING
If bleeding shows through
the dressing, apply a second
one on top of the first. If blood
seeps through the second
dressing, remove both and apply
a fresh one, ensuring that
pressure is applied accurately at
the point of bleeding.
Support the injured part
in a raised position with
a sling and/or bandage. Check
the circulation beyond the
bandage every ten minutes
(p.243). If the circulation is
impaired, loosen the bandage
and reapply.
Monitor and record vital
signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—while waiting
for help to arrive.
Secure the dressing with a bandage that is
firm enough to maintain pressure, but not so
tight that it impairs circulation (p.243). Call 911 for
emergency help if this has not been done already.
6
7 8
5
SPECIAL CASE IF THERE IS AN OBJECT IN THE WOUND
116 SEE ALSO Crush injury p.118 | Head injury pp.144–45 | Shock pp.112–13
 ■ Initially, pale, cold, clammy skin. If
bleeding continues, the skin may
turn blue-gray (cyanosis)
 ■ Rapid, weak pulse
 ■ Thirst
 ■ Rapid, shallow breathing
 ■ Confusion, restlessness,
and irritability
 ■ Possible collapse and
unconsciousness
 ■ Bleeding from body
openings (orifices)
 ■ In cases of violent injury, “pattern
bruising”—an area of discolored
skin with a shape that matches the
pattern of clothes or crushing or
restraining objects
 ■ Pain
 ■ Information from the casualty that
indicates recent injury or illness
RECOGNITION Bleeding inside body cavities may follow an injury, such as
a fracture or a blow from a blunt object, but it can also occur
spontaneously—for example, bleeding from a stomach ulcer. The
main risk from internal bleeding is shock (pp.112–13). In addition,
blood can build up around organs such as the lungs or brain and
exert damaging pressure on them.
Suspect internal bleeding if a casualty develops signs of shock
without obvious blood loss. Check for any bleeding from body
openings such as the ear, mouth, and nose. There may also be
bleeding from the urethra, vagina, or anus (below).
The signs of bleeding vary depending on the site of the blood
loss (below), but the most obvious is a discharge of blood from a
body opening. Blood loss from any orifice is significant and can
lead to shock. In addition, bleeding from some orifices can
indicate a serious underlying injury or illness. Follow treatment
for shock (pp.112–13).
INTERNAL BLEEDING
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION
■ Bright red, frothy, coughed-up blood ■ Bleeding in lungs
■ Vomited blood, red or dark reddish
brown, resembling coffee grounds
■ Bleeding within digestive system
Mouth
SITE APPEARANCE OF BLOOD CAUSE OF BLOOD LOSS
Ear
Nose
Anus
Urethra
Vagina
■ Fresh, bright red blood ■ Injury to inner or outer ear or perforated eardrum
■ Thin, watery blood ■ Leakage of fluid from around brain due to head injury
(skull fracture)
■ Thin, watery blood ■ Leakage of fluid from around brain due to head injury
(skull fracture)
■ Fresh, bright red blood ■ Ruptured blood vessel in nostril
■ Fresh, bright red blood ■ Hemorrhoids ■ Injury to anus or lower intestine ■ Brisk
upper gastrointestinal bleeding
■ Black, tarry stool (melena) ■ Disease or injury to intestine
■ Red or smoky appearance to urine,
occasionally containing clots
■ Bleeding from bladder, kidneys, or urethra
■ Either fresh or dark blood ■ Menstruation ■ Miscarriage ■ Ectopic pregnancy
■ Pregnancy ■ Recent childbirth ■ Assault
POSSIBLE SIGNS OF INTERNAL BLEEDING
117
IMPALEMENT
INTERNAL BLEEDING | IMPALEMENT | AMPUTATION
SEE ALSO Severe external bleeding pp.114–15 | Shock pp.112–13
If someone has been impaled, for example by falling onto
railings, never attempt to lift the casualty off the object
involved because this may worsen internal injuries. Call the
emergency services immediately, giving clear details about the
incident. They will bring special cutting equipment with them
to free the casualty.
A limb that has been partially or completely severed can,
in many cases, be reattached by microsurgery. The operation
will require a general anesthetic, so do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink. It is vital to get the casualty and the amputated
part to the hospital as soon as possible. Shock is possible, and
needs to be treated.
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO
Control blood loss by applying direct pressure and raising the
injured part above the casualty’s heart.
Call 911 for emergency
help. Send a helper to make
the call, if possible. Explain
the situation clearly to the
dispatcher, so that the right
equipment will be brought.
Support the casualty’s body
weight until the emergency
services arrive and take over.
Reassure the casualty while you
wait for emergency help.
Place a sterile dressing or a clean gauze pad on the wound, and
secure it with a bandage. If you are trained to use a tournequet, it
may be appropriate. Treat the casualty for shock (pp.112–13).
Call 911 for emergency help. Tell the dispatcher that an
amputation is involved. Monitor and record vital signs—level
of response, breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)—while waiting for
help to arrive.
Wrap the severed part in plastic wrap or a plastic bag. Wrap the
package in gauze or soft fabric and place it in a container full of
crushed ice. Mark the container with the time of injury and the
casualty’s name. Give it to the emergency service personnel yourself.
1
1 2
2
3
4
AMPUTATION
 ■ To prevent further injury
 ■ To control bleeding
 ■ To minimize the effects of shock
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
 ■ To prevent deterioration of the
injured part
YOUR AIM
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
CAUTION
CAUTION
 ■ Do not wash the severed part.
 ■ Do not let the severed part
touch the crushed ice when
packing it.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty to eat
or drink because an anesthetic
may be needed.
118 SEE ALSO Fractures pp.136–38 | Severe external bleeding pp.114–15 | Shock pp.112–13
WHAT TO DO
If you know the casualty has been crushed for
less than 15 minutes and you can release him, do
this as quickly as possible. Control external bleeding
and steady and support any suspected fracture
(pp.136–38). Treat the casualty for shock (pp.112–13)
but do not raise his legs.
If the casualty has been crushed for more than
15 minutes, or you cannot move the cause of
injury, leave him in the position found and comfort
and reassure him.
Call 911 for emergency help, giving clear
details of the incident to the dispatcher.
Monitor and record vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)—
while waiting for help to arrive.
2
3
1
4
Traffic accidents and building site collapses are the most
common causes of crush injuries. Other possible causes include
explosions, earthquakes, and train crashes.
A crush injury may include a fracture, swelling, and internal
bleeding. The crushing force may cause impaired circulation,
resulting in numbness at or below the site of injury. You may not
detect a pulse in a crushed limb.
DANGERS OF PROLONGED CRUSHING
If the casualty is trapped for any length of time, two serious
complications may result. First, prolonged crushing may cause
extensive damage to body tissues, especially to muscles. Once the
pressure is removed, shock may develop rapidly as tissue fluid leaks
into the injured area.
More dangerous, toxic substances build up in damaged muscle
tissue around a crush injury. If released suddenly into the circulation,
these toxins may cause the heart to experience a life-threatening
rhythm disturbance first or kidney failure later. This process, called
“crush syndrome,” is extremely serious and can be fatal.
CRUSH INJURY
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION
 ■ To obtain specialist medical aid
urgently, taking any steps possible to
treat the casualty
YOUR AIM
 ■ Do not release a casualty who
has been crushed for more than
15 minutes.
 ■ Do not lift heavy objects.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
CAUTION
119
CRUSH INJURY | CUTS AND SCRAPES | BRUISING
CUTS AND SCRAPES
SEE ALSO Foreign object in wound p.121 | Infected wound p.120 | Internal bleeding p.116
 ■ To control bleeding
 ■ To minimize the risk of infection
 ■ To reduce blood flow to the injury, in
order to minimize swelling
YOUR AIMS
YOUR AIM
Bleeding from small cuts and scrapes is easily controlled by pressure
and elevation. An adhesive bandage is normally all that is required,
and the wound will heal by itself in a few days. Medical help needs
to be sought only if: bleeding does not stop; there is a foreign object
embedded in the cut (p.121); there is a particular risk of infection,
from a human or animal bite (p.203), or a puncture by a dirty object;
or an old wound shows signs of becoming infected (p.120).
Caused by bleeding into the skin or into tissues beneath the
skin, a bruise can either develop rapidly or emerge a few days
after injury. Bruising can also indicate deep injury. Elderly people
and those taking anticoagulant (anticlotting) drugs, such as
aspirin or warfarin, can bruise easily.
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO
If the wound is dirty, clean
it by rinsing under running
water, or use alcohol-free wipes.
Pat the wound dry using
a gauze swab and cover it with
sterile gauze.
Raise and support the
injured part above the level
of the heart, if possible. Avoid
touching the wound.
Clean the area around
the wound with soap and
water. Wipe away from the wound
and use a clean swab for each
stroke. Pat dry. Remove the
wound covering and apply a sterile
dressing. If there is a particular
risk of infection, advise the
casualty to seek medical advice.
Place a cold compress
(p.241). over the bruise for at
least ten minutes.
Raise and support
the injured part in
a comfortable position.
2
1
3
1 2
BRUISING
Ask the casualty about tetanus
immunization. Seek medical
advice if:
 ■ He has a dirty wound
 ■ He has never been immunized
 ■ He is not sure whether he is up
to date on his injections
SPECIAL CASE TETANUS
This is a dangerous infection
caused by a bacterium that lives
in soil. If it enters a wound, it
may multiply in the damaged
tissues and release a toxin that
spreads through the nervous
system, causing muscle spasms,
paralysis, and death. Tetanus can
be prevented by immunization,
which is normally given in
childhood and repeated as
boosters in adulthood.
CAUTION
120
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION
SEE ALSO Bleeding and types of wound pp.110–11 | Cuts and scrapes p.119
 ■ Increasing pain and soreness at the
site of the wound
 ■ Swelling, redness, and a feeling of
heat around the injury
 ■ Pus within, or oozing from, the
wound
 ■ Swelling and tenderness of the
glands in the neck, armpit, or groin
 ■ Faint red trails on the skin that lead
to the glands in the neck, armpit,
or groin
If infection is advanced:
 ■ Signs of fever, such as sweating,
thirst, shivering, and lethargy
 ■ To prevent further infection
 ■ To obtain medical advice if necessary
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not burst a blister because it
increases the risk of infection.
Blisters occur when the skin is repeatedly rubbed against another
surface or when it is exposed to heat. The damaged area of skin
leaks tissue fluid that collects under the top layer of the skin,
forming a blister.
An open wound can become contaminated with microorganisms
(germs). The germs may come from the source of the injury, from
the environment, from the mouth, the fingers, or from particles of
clothing embedded in a wound (as may occur in gunshot wounds).
Bleeding may flush some dirt away; remaining germs may be
destroyed by the white blood cells. However, if dirt or dead tissue
remain in a wound, infection may spread through the body. There
is also a risk of tetanus (p.119).
Any wound that does not begin to heal within 48 hours is likely
to be infected. A casualty with a wound that is at high risk of
infection may need treatment with antibiotics and/or tetanus
immunization (p.119).
BLISTERS
INFECTED WOUND
WHAT TO DO
Cover the wound with a sterile dressing or large clean, nonstick
pad, and bandage it in place.
Raise and support the injured part with a sling and/or bandages.
This helps reduce the swelling around the injury.
Advise the casualty to seek medical advice. If infection is
advanced (with signs of fever, such as sweating, shivering, and
lethargy), take or send the casualty to the hospital.
2
1
3
WHAT TO DO
Wash the area with clean water and rinse.
Gently pat the area and surrounding skin
thoroughly dry with a sterile gauze pad. If it is
not possible to wash the area, keep it as clean
as possible.
Cover the blister with an adhesive dressing;
make sure the pad of the bandage is larger
than the blister. Ideally use a blister bandage, which
has a cushioned pad that provides extra protection
and comfort.
1 2
CAUTION
121
FOREIGN OBJECT IN A WOUND
SEE ALSO Cuts and scrapes p.119 | Embedded fishhook p.195 | Severe external bleeding pp.114–15 | Splinter p.194
 ■ To control bleeding without pressing
the object farther into the wound
 ■ To minimize the risk of infection
 ■ To arrange transportation to the
hospital if necessary
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Ask the casualty about tetanus
immunization. Seek medical
advice if:
 ■ He has a dirty wound.
 ■ He has never been immunized.
 ■ He is not sure he is up to date
with his immunizations.
WHAT TO DO
Control bleeding by
applying pressure on either
side of the object (see p.115) and
raising the area above the
casualty’s heart level. Drape a
piece of gauze over the wound
and object.
Build up padding on either
side of the object (rolled
bandages make good padding)
until it is high enough for you
to be able to bandage over the
object without pressing it
farther into the wound. Hold
the padding in place until the
bandaging is complete.
Arrange to take or send the
casualty to the hospital.
2
3
1
It is important to remove foreign objects, such as small pieces of
glass or grit, from a wound before beginning treatment. If left in a
wound, they may cause infection or delay healing. The best way to
remove superficial pieces of glass or grit from the skin is to pick
them out with tweezers. Alternatively, rinse loose pieces off with
running water. Do not try to remove pieces that are firmly
embedded in the wound because you may damage the surrounding
tissue and aggravate bleeding. Instead, cover the object with a
dressing and bandage and take the casualty to a healthcare provider.
BLISTERS | INFECTED WOUND | FOREIGN OBJECT IN A WOUND
Never remove impaled objects,
such as pencils, knives, or
branches. If you cannot build
padding high enough to bandage
over the top of an object, drape a
clean piece of gauze over it.
Place padding on either side of
the object, then secure it in place
by bandaging above and below
the object.
SPECIAL CASE BANDAGING AROUND A LARGER OBJECT
CAUTION
122
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION
SEE ALSO Head injury p.144–45 | Shock pp.112–13 | Spinal injury pp.157–59
 ■ To control bleeding
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ If at any stage the person loses
consciousness and is not
breathing normally, begin CPR
with chest compressions
(pp.54–87).
The scalp has many small blood vessels running close to the
skin surface, so any cut can result in profuse bleeding, which
often makes a scalp wound appear worse than it is.
In some cases, however, a scalp wound may form part of a
more serious underlying head injury, such as a skull fracture, or
may be associated with a neck injury. For these reasons, you
should examine a casualty with a scalp wound very carefully,
particularly if it is possible that signs of a serious head injury are
being masked by alcohol or drug intoxication. If you are in any
doubt, follow the treatment for head injury (p.144–45). In
addition, bear in mind the possibility of a neck (spinal) injury.
WHAT TO DO
If there are any displaced flaps of skin at the
injury site, carefully replace them over the
wound. Reassure the casualty.
Keep the pad in place with a roller bandage to
secure the pad and maintain pressure.
Help the casualty lie down with her head and
shoulders slightly raised. If she feels faint or
dizzy or shows any signs of shock, call 911 for
emergency help. Monitor and record vital
signs—level of response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—while waiting for help.
Cover the wound with a sterile dressing or a
large clean, gauze pad. Apply firm, direct
pressure on the pad to help control bleeding to
reduce blood loss, and minimize the risk of shock.
3
4
2
1
SCALP AND HEAD WOUNDS
CAUTION
123
SCALP AND HEAD WOUNDS | EYE WOUND | BLEEDING FROM THE EAR
EYE WOUND
BLEEDING FROM THE EAR
 ■ Pain in the eye or eyelids
 ■ Visible wound and/or bloodshot
appearance
 ■ Partial or total loss of vision
 ■ Leakage of blood or clear fluid from
a wound
RECOGNITION
The eye can be bruised or cut by direct blows or by sharp,
chipped fragments of metal, grit, and glass.
All eye injuries are potentially serious because of the
risk to the casualty’s vision. Even superficial abrasions to the
surface (cornea) of the eye can lead to scarring or infection, with
the possibility of permanent deterioration of vision.
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty into a half-sitting position or onto on his back,
and hold his head to keep it as still as possible. Tell him to keep
both eyes still because movement of the “good” eye will cause
movement of the injured one, which may damage it further.
Give the casualty a sterile
dressing or a clean, nonfluffy
pad to hold over the affected eye. If
it will take some time to obtain
medical help, secure the pad in
place with a bandage. Do not apply
pressure to the injured eye.
2
1
2
This may be due to a burst (perforated) eardrum, an ear
infection, a blow to the side of the head, or an explosion.
Symptoms include a sharp pain, earache, deafness, and possibly
dizziness. The presence of blood or blood-stained watery fluid or
indicates a more serious, underlying head injury (pp.144–45).
 ■ To arrange transportation to
the hospital.
YOUR AIM
 ■ If you suspect a head injury
(pp.144–45), support the
casualty’s head in the position
you found him and call 911 for
emergency help.
Hold a sterile dressing
or a clean, gauze pad lightly
in place on the ear. Do not plug
the ear. Send or take the
casualty to the hospital.
Help the casualty into a
half-sitting position, with
his head tilted to the injured
side to allow blood to drain
from the ear.
1
 ■ To prevent further damage
 ■ To arrange transportation to
the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not touch or attempt to
remove anything that is sticking
to, or embedded in, the eyeball
or on the colored part (iris) of
the eye. Instead, place a paper
cup over the affected eye and
bandage it in place.
Arrange to take or send
the casualty to the hospital. 3
SEE ALSO Foreign object in the ear p.197 | Head injury pp.144–45
CAUTION
CAUTION
124
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION
WHAT TO DO
Tell the casualty to sit down and tilt his head
forward to allow the blood to drain from the
nostrils. Ask him to breathe through his mouth (this
will have a calming effect) and to pinch the soft part
of his nose for up to ten minutes, holding constant
pressure. Reassure and help him if necessary.
Advise the casualty not to speak, swallow,
cough, spit, or sniff since this may disturb
blood clots that have formed in the nose. Give him
a clean cloth or tissue to mop up any dribbling.
After ten minutes, tell the casualty to
release the pressure. If the bleeding has
not stopped, tell him to reapply the pressure
for two further periods of ten minutes.
2
1
3
NOSEBLEED
 ■ To maintain an open airway
 ■ To control bleeding
YOUR AIMS
Bleeding from the nose most commonly occurs when tiny
blood vessels inside the nostrils are ruptured, either by a blow to
the nose, or as a result of sneezing, picking, or blowing the nose.
Nosebleeds may also occur as a result of high blood pressure and
anticlotting medication.
A nosebleed can be serious if the casualty loses a lot of blood.
In addition, if bleeding follows a head injury, the blood may
appear thin and watery. The latter is a very serious sign
because it indicates that the skull is fractured and fluid is
leaking from around the brain.
 ■ Do not let the casualty tip his
head back because blood may
then run down the throat and
induce vomiting.
Once the bleeding has stopped, and with
the casualty still leaning forward, clean around
his nose with lukewarm water. Advise him to rest
quietly for a few hours. Tell him to avoid exertion
and, in particular, not to blow his nose, because this
could disturb any clots.
4
If bleeding stops and then restarts, help
the casualty reapply pressure. 5
If the nosebleed is severe, or if it lasts
longer than 30 minutes, arrange to take
or send the casualty to the hospital.
6
SEE ALSO Foreign object in the nose p.197 | Head injury pp.144–45
A child may be worried
by a nosebleed. Tell her
to lean forward, and
then pinch her nose for
her, reassure her, and
give her a bowl to spit
or dribble into.
CAUTION
SPECIAL CASE FOR A YOUNG CHILD
125
NOSEBLEED | KNOCKED-OUT ADULT TOOTH | BLEEDING FROM THE MOUTH
KNOCKED-OUT ADULT TOOTH
If a secondary (adult) tooth is knocked out, it should be replanted
in its socket as soon as possible. Gently rinse off any dirt before
replacing it in the socket. If this is not possible, ask the casualty to
keep the tooth inside his cheek or under his tongue if he feels able to
do this without swallowing the tooth. Alternatively, place it in a small
container of milk to prevent it from drying out.
Cuts to the tongue, lips, or lining of the mouth range from minor
injuries to more serious wounds. The cause is usually the casualty’s
own teeth or dental extraction. Bleeding from the mouth may be
profuse and can be alarming. In addition, there is a danger that blood
may be inhaled into the lungs, causing problems with breathing.
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO
Ask the casualty to hold the tooth firmly in place. Send him to
a dentist or the hospital.
Gently push the tooth into the socket. Then press a gauze pad
between the bottom and top teeth to help keep the tooth in place.
If bleeding persists, replace
the pad. Tell the casualty
to let the blood dribble out; if
she swallows it, it may induce
vomiting. Do not wash the
mouth out because this may
disturb a clot. Advise her to
avoid drinking anything hot for
12 hours.
Ask the casualty to sit
down, with her head
forward and tilted slightly to the
injured side, to allow blood to
drain from her mouth. Place a
sterile gauze pad over the
wound. Ask the casualty to
squeeze the pad between finger
and thumb and press on the
wound for ten minutes.
2
1
1 2
BLEEDING FROM THE MOUTH
To control bleeding from a tooth
socket, roll a gauze pad or tea
bag thick enough to keep the
casualty’s teeth from meeting,
place it across the empty socket,
and tell him to bite down on it.
 ■ Do not clean off any fleshy
debris—you may damage the
tissues, reducing the chance of
reimplantation.
 ■ If the wound is large, or bleeding
lasts longer than 30 minutes
or restarts, seek medical or
dental advice.
YOUR AIMS
 ■ To control bleeding
 ■ To safeguard the airway by
preventing any inhalation of blood
CAUTION
CAUTION
SPECIAL CASE
BLEEDING SOCKET
126
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION
SEE ALSO Amputation p.117 | Foreign object in a wound p.121
 ■ To control bleeding
 ■ To assess whether or not the wound
needs a medical assessment
YOUR AIMS
Injuries to the fingers are common and can vary from small cuts
and scrapes to wounds with underlying damage to bones,
tendons, and ligaments. Injuries to the nails are the most
common. All finger wounds need good management because the
hand is a finely coordinated part of the body that must function
correctly for many everyday activities.
A cut to a finger may go through the skin only or it can cut
through blood vessels, nerves, and tendons that lie just under
the skin. There will be bleeding, which can be profuse, and
possibly bruising, deformity, or loss of movement or sensation
if the underlying structures are damaged.
FINGER WOUND
Seek urgent medical advice if
there is:
 ■ Severe pain
 ■ Severe bleeding
 ■ Missing tissue or nail, or
amputation of part of finger
 ■ Obvious deformity
 ■ A gaping wound
 ■ Numbness, weakness, or loss of
movement in the finger or hand
 ■ A foreign object in the wound WHAT TO DO
Press a sterile dressing or
clean gauze pad on the
wound and apply direct pressure
to control bleeding.
When the bleeding has
stopped, cover the wound
to protect it. Use an adhesive
dressing or for a larger wound
apply a dressing pad, secured with
a tubular gauze bandage. If there
is a fracture or dislocation, the
finger should be splinted.
Seek medical help if
necessary. If you need to
take the casualty to the hospital,
support the injured arm in an
elevation sling (p.252).
Raise and support the
injured hand and maintain
pressure on the wound until the
bleeding stops.
4
5
3
2
CAUTION
If the wound to the finger
breaks the skin, it should be
cleaned with soap and water like
any other abrasion.
1
127
FINGER WOUND | WOUND TO THE PALM | WOUND AT A JOINT CREASE
WOUND TO THE PALM
WOUND AT A JOINT CREASE
SEE ALSO Foreign object in a wound p.121 | Shock pp.112–13
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO
If the wound to the palm
breaks the skin, it should be
cleaned with soap and water.
Press a sterile dressing or
clean pad firmly into the
palm, and ask the casualty to
clench his fist over it or to grasp
his fist with his other hand.
Arrange to take or send him
to the hospital. Every ten
minutes, check the circulation
(p.243) in the lower part of the
limb. If there is no pulse, loosen
the dressing a bit. If active
bleeding recurs, tighten it.
Raise and support the limb.
If possible, help the casualty
lie down with his legs raised and
supported. If you are unable to
control the bleeding and you are
trained to use a tourniquet, it
may be appropriate to do so.
Raise and support the hand.
Bandage the casualty’s
fingers so that they are clenched
over the pad; leave the thumb free
so that you can check circulation.
Tie the ends of the bandage over
the top of the fingers to help
maintain pressure.
Support the arm in an
elevation sling (p.252).
Arrange to take or send him
to the hospital.
Firmly press a sterile
dressing or clean gauze pad
on the injury. If the casualty is
alone and must apply pressure
himself, it may help to bend the
joint as far as it will go, holding
the pad firmly in place.
3
2 3
4
1
2
1
The palm of the hand has a good blood supply, which is why
a wound there may cause profuse bleeding. A deep wound to the
palm may sever tendons and nerves in the hand and result in loss
of feeling or movement in the fingers.
Bandaging the fist can be an effective way to control bleeding.
If, however, a casualty has a foreign object embedded in a palm wound,
it will be impossible to clench the fist. In such cases, control the
bleeding and bandage the injury using the method described on p.121.
Large blood vessels pass across the inside of the elbow and
back of the knee. If severed, these vessels will bleed profusely.
The steps given below help control bleeding and shock. Take
care to ensure that there is adequate circulation to the part of
the limb beyond the bandage.
YOUR AIMS
YOUR AIMS
 ■ To control bleeding
 ■ To prevent and minimize the effects
of shock
 ■ To arrange transportation to the hospital
 ■ To control bleeding and
minimize the risk of shock
 ■ To minimize the risk
of infection
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
128
WOUNDS AND CIRCULATION
 ■ To minimize shock
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
A stab wound, gunshot, or crush injury to the abdomen may
cause a serious wound. Organs and large blood vessels can be
punctured, lacerated, or ruptured. There may be external
bleeding, protruding abdominal contents, and internal bleeding
and injury. External bleeding and wounds can be treated as below.
ABDOMINAL WOUND
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty lie down on a firm surface, on a blanket if
available. Loosen any tight clothing, such as a belt or a shirt.
Cover wound with a sterile
dressing and hold it firmly;
the casualty may be able to help.
Raise and support the casualty’s
knees to ease strain on injury.
2
1
Be sensitive to the woman’s feelings. The bleeding is possibly
menstrual bleeding, but it can also indicate a more serious
condition such as miscarriage, pregnancy including ruptured
ectopic pregnancy, recent termination of pregnancy, childbirth,
or injury as a result of sexual assault. If the bleeding is severe,
shock may develop.
If a woman has been sexually assaulted, it is vital to preserve
the evidence if possible. Gently advise her to refrain from
washing or using the toilet until a forensic examination has been
performed. If she wishes to remove clothing, keep it intact in a
clean paper bag if possible. Be aware that she may feel vulnerable
and may prefer to be treated by a woman.
 ■ To make the woman comfortable and
reassure her
 ■ To arrange removal to the hospital
if necessary
YOUR AIMS
 ■ If bleeding is severe, call 911 for
emergency help.
 ■ Treat for shock (pp.112–13).
Monitor and record vital
signs (pp.52–53) while waiting
for help.
If she has menstrual period
pains, she may take the
recommended dose of
acetaminophen or ibuprofen.
2 Allow the woman privacy
and give her a sanitary
napkin. Make her comfortable in
whichever position she prefers.
1
 ■ Do not touch any protruding
intestine, and do not put
pressure on the wound. Cover
the area with a clean plastic bag
or plastic wrap to prevent the
wound from drying out. Help
the casualty bend his knees.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing normally,
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
 ■ Do not allow the casualty to eat
or drink because an anesthetic
may be needed.
Call 911 for emergency
help. Treat the casualty for
shock (pp.112–13). Monitor and
record vital signs—breathing,
pulse, and level of response—
(pp.52–53) while waiting for help
to arrive.
3
SEE ALSO Shock pp.112–13
VAGINAL BLEEDING
CAUTION
CAUTION
129
ABDOMINAL WOUND | VAGINAL BLEEDING | BLEEDING VARICOSE VEIN
BLEEDING VARICOSE VEIN
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty lie down on his back. Raise
and support the injured leg as high as
possible immediately, because this reduces the
amount of bleeding.
Rest the injured leg on your shoulder or on a
chair. Apply firm, direct pressure on the
injury, using a sterile dressing, or a clean gauze
pad, until the blood loss is under control. If
necessary, carefully cut away clothing to expose
the site of the bleeding.
Remove garments such as girdles or
pantyhose because these may cause the
bleeding to continue.
2
1
3
 ■ To control bleeding
 ■ To prevent and minimize shock
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
Veins contain one-way valves YOUR AIMS that keep the blood flowing
toward the heart. If these valves fail, blood collects (pools)
behind them and makes the veins swell. This problem, called
varicose veins, usually develops in the legs.
A varicose vein has taut, thin walls and is often raised,
typically producing knobbly skin over the affected area. The vein
can be burst by a gentle knock, and this may result in profuse
bleeding. Shock will quickly develop if bleeding is not controlled.
Keeping the leg raised, put another large,
soft pad over the dressing. Bandage it firmly
enough to exert even pressure, but not so tightly
that the circulation in the limb is impaired.
4
Call 911 for emergency help. Keep the
injured leg raised and supported until the
ambulance arrives. Monitor and record vital
signs—level of response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—regularly until help arrives. In
addition, check the circulation in the limb
beyond the bandage (p.243) every ten minutes.
5
SEE ALSO Shock pp.112–13
The skeleton is the supporting framework
around which the body is constructed.
It is jointed in many places, and muscles
attached to the bones enable us to move.
Most of our movements are controlled at
will and coordinated by impulses that travel
from the brain via the nerves to every
muscle and joint in the body.
It is difficult for a first aider to
distinguish between different bone, joint,
and muscle injuries, so this chapter begins
with an overview of how bones, muscles,
and joints function and how injuries affect
them. First aid treatments for most
injuries, from serious fractures to sprains,
strains, and dislocations, are included
here in this section.
First aid for head and spinal injuries is
also covered in the chapter. There is
anatomical information about the nervous
system that explains how these injuries
can be made worse by potential damage to
the damage and spinal cord.
 ■ To assess the casualty’s condition quickly and calmly
 ■ To support the injured part of the body
 ■ To minimize shock
 ■ To call 911 for emergency help if you suspect a
serious injury
 ■ To comfort and reassure the casualty
 ■ To be aware of your own needs
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
7
BONE, JOINT, AND
MUSCLE INJURIES
132
THE SKELETON
The body is built on a framework of bones
called the skeleton. This structure supports
the muscles, blood vessels, and nerves of the
body. Many bones of the skeleton also
protect important organs such as the
brain and heart. At many points on the
skeleton, bones articulate with each other
by means of joints. These are supported by
ligaments and moved by muscles that are
attached to the bones by tendons.
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
The skeleton
There are 206 bones in the adult
human skeleton, providing a
protective framework for the body.
The skull, spine, and rib cage protect
vital body structures; the pelvis
supports the abdominal organs;
and the bones and joints of the
arms and legs enable the body
to move.
Breastbone (sternum)
Ulna
Radius
Upper arm bone
(humerus)
Collarbone
(clavicle)
Hip joint is point at
which leg bones are
connected to pelvis
Forearm bones
Thighbone (femur)
Kneecap (patella)
Splint bone (fibula)
BONES OF THE HAND
Wrist bones
(carpals)
Hand bone
(metacarpal)
Finger bone
(phalanx)
Shinbone (tibia)
Lower leg bones
Ankle bones (tarsals)
Foot bones (metatarsals)
Shoulder blade
(scapula)
Twelve pairs of ribs form
rib cage, which protects
vital organs in chest and
moves with lungs during
breathing Spine, which is formed
from 26 bones (24
separate vertebrae and
the fused sacrum and
coccyx), protects spinal
cord and enables back
to move
Skull protects brain and
supports structures of face
Collarbones
and shoulder
blades form
shoulder girdle,
to which arms
are attached
Jawbone (mandible) is hinged and
enables mouth to open and close
Pelvis is attached to
lower part of spine
and protects lower
abdominal organs
Scaphoid
133
Also known as the backbone, the spine has
a number of functions. It supports the head,
makes the upper body flexible, helps support
the body’s weight, and protects the spinal cord
(p.157). The spine is a column made up of 26
bones called vertebrae, which are connected by
joints. Between individual vertebrae are disks of
fibrous tissue, known as intervertebral disks,
which help make the spine flexible and cushion
it from jolts. Muscles and ligaments that are
attached to the vertebrae help stabilize the
spine and control the movements of the back.
THE SPINE
This bony structure protects the
brain and the top of the spinal
cord. It also supports the eyes
and other facial structures. The
skull is made up of several bones,
most of which are fused at joints
called sutures. Within the bone
are air spaces (sinuses), which
lighten the skull. The bones
covering the brain form a dome
called the cranium. Several other
bones form the eye sockets, nose,
cheeks, and jaw.
THE SKULL
Spinal column
The vertebrae form five groups: the
cervical vertebrae support the head and
neck; the thoracic vertebrae form an
anchor for the ribs; the lumbar
vertebrae help support the body’s
weight and give stability; the sacrum
supports the pelvis; and the coccyx
forms the end of the spine.
Structures that make the
spine flexible
The joints connecting the vertebrae,
and the disks between the vertebrae,
allow the spine to move. There is only
limited movement between adjacent
vertebrae, but together the vertebrae,
disks, and ligaments allow a range of
movements in the spine as a whole.
THE SKELETON
Structures of the skull
This illustration shows the cranium and the main
bones of the face. The jawbone is the only bone
in the skull that moves significantly.
Cervical spine
(7 bones)
Thoracic spine
(12 bones)
Lumbar spine
(5 bones)
Sacrum
(5 fused bones)
Suture
Parietal bone
Vertebra
Gelatinous
core
PORTION OF SPINE
SECTION OF DISK
Fibrous
covering
Intervertebral disk
Frontal bone
Eye socket
Nasal bone
Lower jawbone
(mandible)
Cheekbone
(zygomatic bone)
Ligaments between
vertebrae help
control movement
of spine
Projection provides
an anchor for
ligaments and
muscles
Coccyx
(4 fused bones)
Occipital bone
Temporal bone Upper jawbone
(maxilla)
134
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
BONES, MUSCLES, AND JOINTS
Bone is a living tissue containing calcium
and phosphorus—minerals that make it hard,
rigid, and strong. From birth to early
adulthood, bones grow by laying down calcium
on the outside. They are also able to generate
new tissue after injury. Age and certain
diseases can weaken bones, making them
brittle and susceptible to breaking or
crumbling, either under stress or
spontaneously. Inherited problems, or
bone disorders such as rickets, cancer,
and infections, can cause bones to become
distorted and weakened. Damage to the bones
during adolescence can shorten a bone or
impair movement. In older people, a disorder
called osteoporosis can cause the bones
to lose density, making them brittle
and prone to breaking.
Muscles cause various parts of the body to move.
Skeletal (voluntary) muscles control movement
and posture. They are attached to bones by bands
of strong, fibrous tissue (tendons), and many
operate in groups. As one group of muscles
contracts, its paired group relaxes.
Involuntary muscles operate the internal
organs, such as the heart, and work constantly,
even while we are asleep. They are controlled
by the autonomic nervous system (p.143).
THE MUSCLES
Parts of a bone
Each bone is covered by a
membrane (periosteum),
which contains nerves and blood
vessels. Under this membrane is
a layer of compact, dense bone;
at the core is spongy bone. In
some bones, there is a cavity at
the center containing soft tissue
called bone marrow.
Straightening the arm
The triceps muscle, at
the back of the upper
arm, shortens
(contracts) to pull
down the bones of the
forearm. The biceps
muscle, at the front
of the arm, relaxes.
Bending the arm
The biceps muscle, at
the front of the arm,
shortens (contracts),
pulling the bones of
the forearm upward
to bend the arm. At
the same time, the
triceps muscle relaxes
and lengthens.
Spongy bone
Compact bone
Bone marrow
Vein Nerve Artery Periosteum
Triceps muscle
contracts
Biceps muscle
relaxes
Tendon
Triceps muscle
relaxes
Biceps muscle
contracts
135
BONES, MUSCLES, AND JOINTS
THE JOINTS
A joint is where one bone meets another.
In a few joints (immovable joints), the bone
edges fit together or are fused. Immovable
joints are found in the skull and pelvis.
Most joints are movable, and the bone ends
are joined by fibrous tissue called ligaments,
which form a capsule around the joint.
The capsule lining (synovial membrane)
produces fluid to lubricate the joint; the ends
of the bones are also protected by smooth
cartilage. Muscles that move the joint are
attached to the bones by tendons. The degree
and type of movement depends on the way
the ends of the bones fit together, the
strength of the ligaments, and the
arrangement of muscles.
Structures of a movable joint
Cartilage covers the bone ends
and minimizes friction. Bands of
tissue (ligaments) hold the ends
together. The joint is enclosed in
a lubricant-filled capsule.
Pivot joint
One bone
rotates within
a fixed collar
formed by
another,
as at the base
of the skull.
Saddle joint
Bone ends meet at
right angles in this
joint. The only
example is at the
base of the thumb.
Hinge joint
This joint allows bending
and straightening in only
one plane, as in the
knees and elbows.
Plane joint
Surfaces of this type
of joint are almost
flat and slide over
each other. This joint
is found in the wrist
and foot.
Ball-and-socket joint
This joint allows
movement in all
directions. Examples are
the hip and shoulder.
Ellipsoidal joint
In this type of joint, movement
can occur in most directions. The
wrist joint is an example.
Bone
Ligament
Cartilage
Synovial
membrane
Synovial fluid
136
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
 ■ To prevent movement at the
injury site
 ■ To arrange transportation to the
hospital, with comfortable support
during transit
YOUR AIMS
FRACTURES
There may be:
 ■ Deformity, swelling, and bruising
at the fracture site
 ■ Pain and/or difficulty in moving
the area
 ■ Shortening, bending, or twisting of
a limb
 ■ Coarse grating (crepitus) of the bone
ends that can be heard or felt (by
casualty). Do not try to seek this.
 ■ Signs of shock, especially if the
thighbone or pelvis are fractured
 ■ Difficulty in moving a limb normally
or at all (for example, inability
to walk)
 ■ A wound, possibly with bone ends
protruding (Treating an open
fracture, p.138)
RECOGNITION A break or crack in a bone is called a fracture. Considerable
force is needed to break a bone, unless it is diseased or old.
However, bones that are still growing are supple and may split,
bend, or crack like a twig. A bone may break at the point where a
heavy blow is received. Fractures may also result from a twist or
a wrench (indirect force).
In an open fracture, one of the broken bone ends may pierce the
skin surface, or there may be a wound at the fracture site. An
open fracture carries a high risk of becoming infected.
In a closed fracture, the skin above the fracture is intact.
However, bones may be displaced (unstable), causing internal
bleeding and the casualty may develop shock (pp.112–13).
OPEN AND CLOSED FRACTURES
A stable fracture occurs when the broken bone ends do not
move because they are not completely broken or they are
impacted. Such injuries are common at the wrist, shoulder, ankle,
and hip. Usually, these fractures can be gently handled without
further damage.
In an unstable fracture, the broken bone ends can easily move.
There is a risk that they may damage blood vessels, nerves, and
organs around the injury. Unstable injuries can occur if the bone
is broken or the ligaments are torn (ruptured). They should be
handled carefully to prevent further damage.
STABLE AND UNSTABLE FRACTURES
Closed fracture
The skin is not
broken, although
the bone ends may
damage nearby
tissues and blood
vessels. Internal
bleeding is a risk.
Open fracture
Bone is exposed at
the surface where it
breaks the skin. The
casualty may suffer
bleeding and shock.
Infection is a risk.
Stable fracture
Although the bone
is fractured, the
ends of the injury
remain in place. The
risk of bleeding or
further damage is
minimal.
Unstable fracture
In this type of
fracture, the broken
bone ends can
easily be displaced
by movement or
muscle contraction.
Pelvis
Femur
137
FRACTURES
SEE ALSO Crush injury p.118 | Internal bleeding p.116 | Shock pp.112–13
WHAT TO DO FOR A CLOSED FRACTURE
Advise the casualty to keep still. Support the joints above and
below the injury with your hands until it is immobilized with a
sling or bandages, in the position in which it is found.
Place padding around the injury for extra support. Take or send
the casualty to the hospital; a casualty with an arm injury may be
transported by car; call 911 for emergency help for a leg injury.
For firmer support and/or if removal to the hospital is likely to
be delayed, secure the injured part to an unaffected part of the
body. For upper limb fractures, immobilize the arm with a sling
(pp.251–52). For lower limb fractures, move the uninjured leg to the
injured one and secure with broad-fold bandages (p.249). Always tie
knots on the uninjured side.
Treat for shock if necessary (pp.112–13) . Do not raise an injured
leg. Elevate an uninjured limb if shock is present. Monitor and
record vital signs (pp.52–53) while waiting for help. Check the
circulation beyond a sling or bandage (p.243) every ten minutes.
If the circulation is impaired, loosen the bandages.
1
2
3
4
 ■ Do not move the casualty until
the injured part is secured
and supported, unless she
is in immediate danger.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
»
CAUTION
138
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
SEE ALSO Severe external bleeding pp.114–15 | Shock pp.112–13
 ■ To prevent blood loss, movement,
and infection at the site of injury
 ■ To arrange removal to the hospital,
with comfortable support
YOUR AIMS
WHAT TO DO FOR AN OPEN FRACTURE
Cover the wound with a sterile dressing or large, clean, gauze
pad. Apply pressure around the injury to control bleeding
(pp.114–15); be careful not to press on a protruding bone.
1
Carefully place a sterile wound dressing or more clean padding
over and around the dressing. 2
Secure the dressing and padding with a bandage. Bandage firmly,
but not so tightly that it impairs the circulation beyond
the bandage.
3
Treat the casualty for shock (pp.112–13) if necessary. Do not raise
the injured leg. Monitor and record vital signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)—while waiting for help to arrive.
Check the circulation beyond the bandage (p.243) every ten minutes.
If the circulation is impaired, loosen the bandages.
5
Immobilize the injured part as for a closed fracture (p.137), and
arrange to transport the casualty to the hospital. 4
 ■ Do not move the casualty until
the injured part is secured and
supported, unless he is in
immediate danger.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ Do not press directly on
a protruding bone end.
«FRACTURES
If a bone end is protruding,
build up pads of clean, soft,
nonfluffy material around the
bone, until you can bandage
over it without pressing
on the injury.
CAUTION
SPECIAL CASE
PROTRUDING BONE
FRACTURES | DISLOCATED JOINT
139
DISLOCATED JOINT
There may be:
 ■ “Sickening,” severe pain
 ■ Inability to move the joint
 ■ Swelling and bruising around the
affected joint
 ■ Shortening, bending or deformity of
the area
RECOGNITION
 ■ To prevent movement at
the injury site.
 ■ To arrange removal to the hospital,
with comfortable support.
YOUR AIMS
SEE ALSO Fractures pp.136–38 | Strains and sprains pp.140–41
WHAT TO DO
If, for example, the casualty
has a dislocated shoulder,
advise the casualty to keep still.
Help him support the injured
arm in the position he finds
most comfortable.
1
Arrange to take or send the casualty to the hospital. Treat for
shock if necessary. Monitor and record vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse—(pp.52–53) while waiting for help.
 ■ Do not try to replace a dislocated
bone into its socket because this
may cause further injury.
 ■ Do not move the casualty until
the injured part is secured and
supported, unless she is in
immediate danger.
 ■ For a hand or arm injury remove
bracelets, rings, and watches in
case of swelling.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty to eat
or drink because an anesthetic
may be needed.
This is a joint injury in which the bones are partially or
completely pulled out of their normal position. Dislocation
can be caused by a strong force wrenching the bone into an
abnormal position, or by violent muscle contraction. This very
painful injury most often affects the shoulder, knee, jaw, or joints
in the thumbs or fingers. Dislocations may be associated with
torn ligaments (pp.140–41), or with damage to the synovial
membrane that lines the joint capsule (p.135).
Joint dislocation can have serious consequences. If vertebrae
are dislocated, the spinal cord can be damaged. Dislocation of
the shoulder or hip may damage the large nerves that supply the
limbs and result in partial paralysis. A dislocation of any joint
may also fracture the bones involved. It is difficult to distinguish
a dislocation from a closed fracture (p.136). If you are in any
doubt, treat the injury as a fracture.
For extra support for an injured arm, secure the limb to the chest
by tying a broad-fold bandage (p.249) around the chest and
the sling.
3
Check the circulation beyond the bandages (p.243) every
ten minutes. 5
Immobilize the injured arm
with a sling (p.251). 2
4
CAUTION
140
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
STRAINS AND SPRAINS
The softer structures around bones and
joints—the ligaments, muscles, and tendons—
can be injured in several ways. Injuries to these
soft tissues are commonly called strains and
sprains. They occur when the tissues are
overstretched and partially or completely torn
(ruptured) by violent or sudden movements. For
this reason, strains and sprains are frequently
associated with sports.
Strains and sprains should be treated initially
by the “RICE” procedure:
R—Rest the injured part;
I—Apply Ice pack or a cold pad;
C—Provide comfortable support with mild
Compression from an elastic bandage;
E—Elevate the injured part.
This procedure may be sufficient to relieve the
symptoms, but if you are in any doubt, treat it
as a fracture (pp.136–38).
Muscles and tendons may be strained, ruptured,
or bruised. A strain occurs when the muscle is
overstretched; it may be partially torn, often at
the junction between the muscle and the tendon
that joins it to a bone. In a rupture, a muscle or
tendon is torn completely; this may occur in the
main bulk of the muscle or in the tendon. Deep
bruising can be extensive in parts of the body
where there is a large bulk of muscle. Injuries in
these areas are usually accompanied by bleeding
into the surrounding tissues, which can lead to
pain, swelling, and bruising.
MUSCLE AND TENDON INJURY
Muscle tears
Vigorous movements may cause muscle fibers, such as
the hamstring in the leg, to tear. Muscle tears can cause
severe pain and swelling.
Ruptured tendon
The Achilles tendon attaches the calf muscle to the heel
bone. It can snap after sudden exertion and may need
surgery and immobilization.
One common ligament injury is a sprain.
This is the stretching or tearing of a ligament
at or near a joint. It is often due to a sudden
or unexpected wrenching motion that
pulls the bones in the joint too far apart,
tearing the surrounding tissues.
LIGAMENT INJURY
Sprained ankle
This is due to overstretching
or tearing of one or more
ligaments—the fibrous
cords that connect bones
at a joint. In this example,
one of the ligaments in the
ankle is partially torn.
Ruptured
Achilles
tendon
Normal
muscle fibers
Torn muscle
fibers produce
localized pain
and swelling
Tibialis anterior
tendon
Tibia Fibula
Sprained
ligament
Heel
bone
141
STRAINS AND SPRAINS
There may be:
 ■ Pain and tenderness
 ■ Difficulty in moving the injured part,
especially if it is a joint
 ■ Swelling and bruising in the area
RECOGNITION
 ■ To reduce swelling and pain
 ■ To obtain medical help
if necessary
YOUR AIMS
SEE ALSO Cold compresses p.241 | Fractures pp.136–38
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty sit or lie
down. Support the injured
part in a comfortable position,
preferably raised.
Cool the area by applying a
cold compress, such as an
ice pack in a towel (p.241), to
the injury. This helps reduce
swelling, bruising, and pain.
1 2
Apply comfortable support to the injured part.
Leave the cold compress in place or wrap an
elastic bandage around the area. Secure it with a
support bandage that extends to the next joint; for
an ankle injury, the bandage should extend from
the base of the toes to below the knee.
3 Support the injured part in a raised position to
help minimize bruising and swelling in the area.
Check the circulation beyond the bandages (p.243)
every ten minutes. If the circulation is impaired,
loosen the bandages.
4
If the pain is severe, or the casualty is unable
to use the injured part, arrange to take or send
him to the hospital. Otherwise, advise the casualty
to rest the injury and to seek medical advice
if necessary.
5
142
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
The nervous system is the body's informationgathering, storage, and control system. It
consists of a central processing unit—the
brain—and a network of nerve cells and fibers.
There are two main parts to the nervous
system: the central nervous system,
consisting of the brain and spinal cord, and
the peripheral nervous system, which
consists of all the nerves that connect the
brain and the spinal cord to the rest of the
body. In addition, the autonomic (involuntary)
nervous system controls body functions such
as digestion, heart rate, and breathing. The
central nervous system receives and analyzes
information from all parts of the body. The
nerves carry messages, in the form of highspeed electrical impulses, between the brain
and the rest of the nervous system.
Spinal cord protection
The spinal cord is
protected by the
vertebral column. Nerves
from the spinal cord
emerge between
vertebrae.
Brain
Structure of the
nervous system
The system consists
of the brain, spinal
cord, and a network
of nerves that carry
electrical impulses
between the brain
and the body.
Cross section
through a nerve
Each nerve is made up
of bundles of nerve fibers
(fascicles). A fatty substance
(myelin) surrounds and insulates
larger nerve fibers.
Cranial nerves (12 pairs)
extend directly from the
underside of the brain; most
serve the head, face, neck,
and shoulders
Vagus nerve, longest of the
cranial nerves, serves organs
in chest and abdomen; it
controls the heart rate
Radial nerve
controls
muscles that
straighten
elbow and
fingers
Tibial nerve
serves calf
muscles
Sciatic nerve serves
hip and hamstring
muscles
Body of
vertebra
Spinal nerve
Spinal cord
Nerve fiber
Myelin sheath
Nerve
fascicle
143
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Structure of the brain
The brain is enclosed within the skull. It has
three main parts: the cerebrum, which has an
outer layer called the cortex; the cerebellum;
and the brain stem.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Together the brain and spinal cord make up
the central nervous system (CNS). This system
contains billions of interconnected nerve cells
(neurons) and is enclosed by three
membranes called meninges. A clear fluid
called cerebrospinal fluid flows around the
brain and spinal cord. It functions as a shock
absorber, provides oxygen and nutrients, and
removes waste products.
The brain has three main structures:
the cerebrum, which is concerned with
thought, sensation, and conscious
movement; the cerebellum, which
coordinates movement, balance, and
posture; and the brain stem, which
controls basic functions such as
breathing. The main function of the
spinal cord is to convey signals between
the brain and the peripheral nervous
system (below).
AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Some of the cranial nerves, and several small
spinal nerves, work as the autonomic nervous
system. This system is concerned with vital
body functions such as heart rate and
breathing. The system’s two parts, the
sympathetic and parasympathetic systems,
counterbalance each other. The sympathetic
system prepares the body for action by
releasing hormones that raise the heart rate
and reduce the blood flow to the skin and
intestines. The parasympathetic system
releases hormones with a calming effect.
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
This part of the nervous system consists of
two sets of paired nerves—the cranial and
spinal nerves—connecting the CNS to the
body. The cranial nerves emerge in 12 pairs
from the underside of the brain. The 31 pairs
of spinal nerves branch off at intervals from
the spinal cord, passing into the rest of the
body. Nerves comprise bundles of nerve fibers
that can relay both incoming (sensory) and
outgoing (motor) signals.
Spinal cord extends
from brain stem to
lower end of spine
Vertebral column
protects delicate
spinal cord
Brain
stem
Cerebrum
Cerebellum
Skull
Cerebrospinal
fluid
Meninges (membranes)
surround brain and
spinal cord
144
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURY
HEAD INJURY
Head injuries are common. They are potentially serious because
they can lead to damage to the brain. There may also be injuries
to the spine in the neck, scalp wounds and/or a skull fracture.
If a casualty has sustained a minor injury such as a bruise or
scalp wound, he is likely to be fully conscious. If he has suffered
a more serious blow to the head, such as in a sporting impact,
consciousness may be temporarily impaired.
The brain lies inside the skull, cushioned by fluid and can
therefore be shaken by a blow to the head. This is called
concussion and it often produces a temporary loss of
consciousness. Complications from concussion may affect
thinking, language, or emotions, and may lead to problems with
communication and memory, and cause personality changes,
depression, and early-onset dementia.
If a casualty has suffered a severe blow to his head, this may
cause bleeding or swelling inside the skull that can press on the
brain (compression). This is a serious condition. The pressure
can rise immediately after the impact or it may develop a few
hours or even days later. The severity of the head injury is
related to the mechanism of injury and its impact on the head.
A serious head injury is likely after a high speed motor collision
or a fall from a height.
Seek medical advice if you
notice signs of a worsening
head injury such as:
 ■ Increasing drowsiness
 ■ Persistent headache
 ■ Confusion, dizziness, balance
problems, and/or memory loss
 ■ Difficulty speaking
 ■ Difficulty walking
 ■ Vomiting episodes after the
injury
 ■ Double vision
 ■ Seizure
Causes of head injury
The brain can be literally “shaken” inside
the skull with concussion (below). Injury that
results in bleeding can cause pressure to
build up inside the skull and damage the
tissues of the brain (below right).
Skull
Brain
Indirect force from
blow shakes brain
within skull
Skull
Accumulated blood
Brain presses on brain
Assess a casualty’s level of
consciousness using the AVPU
scale. Check the casualty at
regular intervals. Make a
note of your findings at each
assessment, paying particular
attention to any change—the
casualty’s condition may improve
or deteriorate while you are
looking after him.
A—Is the casualty Alert? Are his
 eyes open and does he respond
 to questions?
V—Does the casualty respond to
 Voice? Can he answer simple
 questions and obey commands?
P—Does the casualty respond to
 Pain? Does he move or open
 his eyes if pinched?
U—Is he Unresponsive to any
 stimulus?
ASSESSING THE LEVEL OF
CONSCIOUSNESS
CONCUSSION COMPRESSION Direction of force
CAUTION
145
HEAD INJURY
There may be:
 ■ Brief period of impaired
consciousness
 ■ Scalp wound
 ■ Dizziness or nausea
 ■ Loss of memory of events at the
time of, or immediately preceding
the injury
 ■ Mild generalized headache
 ■ Confusion
For severe head injury there may
also be:
 ■ History of a severe blow to the head
 ■ Deteriorating level of response
 ■ Loss of consciousness
 ■ Leakage of blood or blood-stained
watery fluid from the ears or nose
 ■ Unequal pupil size
RECOGNITION
 ■ To place the casualty in the care of a
responsible person
 ■ To obtain medical help if the head
injury is associated with loss of
consciousness, confusion, or any
other alteration in consciousness; if
it is associated with motor or sensory
defects, or persistant vomiting
YOUR AIMS
SEE ALSO Facial injury p.146 | Scalp and head wounds p.122 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
Regularly monitor and record vital signs—breathing, pulse and
level of response (pp.52–53). Watch especially for changes in his
level of response.
Sit the casualty down and give him a cold compress to hold
against the injury. Carry out an assessment of the casualty’s level
of consciousness using the AVPU scale (opposite). Treat any scalp
wounds by applying direct pressure to the wound (p.122).
When the casualty has recovered, ask a responsible person to
look after him.
If a casualty’s injury is the result of a sporting accident, do not
allow him to return to the sport until he has been fully assessed
by a medical practitioner.
Advise the casualty to seek medical help or arrange
transportation to a hospital if he develops signs and symptoms of
a worsening head injury (see CAUTION, opposite, and YOUR AIMS,
above), or if ANY of the following apply:
He is over 65 years of age
He has had previous brain surgery
He is taking anticoagulant (anticlotting) medication
The head injury is accompanied by drug or alcohol intoxication
There is no responsible person to look after him
Call 911 for emergency help—tell the dispatcher that you suspect head injury. Maintain an open and
clear airway. Do this in the position the casualty was found—try not to move him because of the
additional risk of spinal injury (pp.158–59). If this is not possible, use the jaw thrust method to open
the airway (p.159). Regularly monitor and record vital signs—breathing, pulse, and level of response
(pp.52–53)—while waiting for help to arrive. Watch especially for changes in his level of response.
SPECIAL CASE SEVERE HEAD INJURY
WHAT TO DO
2
3
4
5
1
146
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
SEE ALSO Head injury pp.144–45 | Knocked-out adult tooth p.125 | Shock pp.112–13 | Spinal injury pp.157–59 |
The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
There may be:
 ■ Pain around affected area
if the jaw is affected, difficulty
speaking, chewing, or swallowing
 ■ Difficulty breathing
 ■ Swelling and distortion of the face
 ■ Bruising and/or a black eye
 ■ Clear fluid or watery blood from the
nose or ear
RECOGNITION
 ■ Never place a bandage
around the lower part of the
face or lower jaw in case
the casualty vomits or has
difficulty breathing.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ If an unconscious casualty is
breathing, place him in the
recovery position (pp.64–65)
with his injured side downward
so that blood or other body
fluids can drain away. Place
soft padding under his head.
 ■ If an unconscious casualty
is not breathing, begin CPR
with chest compressions
(pp54–87). Be aware of
the risk of neck (spinal) injury.
Fractures of facial bones are usually due to hard impacts.
Serious facial fractures may appear frightening. There may be
distortion of the eye sockets, general swelling and bruising, as
well as bleeding from displaced tissues or from the nose and
mouth. The main danger with any facial fracture is that blood,
saliva or swollen tissue may obstruct the airway and cause
breathing difficulties.
When you are examining a casualty with a facial injury,
assume that there is damage to the skull, brain, or neck; don’t
dismiss the symptoms as just the bruising around an eye that is
commonly known as a “black eye.”
FACIAL INJURY
 ■ To keep the airway open
 ■ To minimize pain and swelling
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
WHAT TO DO
Call 911 for emergency help.
Help the casualty sit down
and make sure the airway
is open and clear.
Ask the casualty to spit out
any blood, displaced teeth,
or dentures from his mouth. Put
any teeth in milk to send to the
hospital with him.
1
4
2
Gently place a cold
compress (p.241) against
the casualty’s face to help
reduce pain and minimize
swelling. Treat for shock
(pp.112–13) if necessary.
3
Monitor and record
vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—while waiting for
help to arrive.
5
CAUTION
147
FACIAL INJURY | LOWER JAW INJURY | CHEEKBONE AND NOSE INJURY
CHEEKBONE AND NOSE INJURY
SEE ALSO Facial injury opposite | Head injury pp.144–45 | Knocked-out adult tooth p.125 | Nosebleed p.124
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO
There may be:
 ■ Pain, swelling and bruising
 ■ Obvious wound or bleeding from
the nose or mouth
RECOGNITION
 ■ If there is clear fluid or watery
blood leaking from the
casualty’s nose, treat the
casualty as for a head injury
(p.144–45).
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ To minimize pain and swelling
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital.
YOUR AIMS
Fractures of the cheekbone and nose are usually the result of
direct blows to the face. Swollen facial tissues are likely to cause
discomfort, and the air passages in the nose may become
blocked, making breathing difficult. These injuries should always
be examined in the hospital.
Gently place a cold
compress, such as a cold
pad or ice pack (p.241), against
the injured area to help reduce
pain and minimize swelling.
1
If the casualty has a
nosebleed, try to pinch
the nose to stop the bleeding
(p.124). Arrange to take
or send the casualty to
the hospital.
2
LOWER JAW INJURY
There may be:
 ■ Difficulty speaking, swallowing,
and moving the jaw
 ■ Pain and nausea when moving
the jaw
 ■ Displaced or loose teeth
and dribbling from the mouth
 ■ Swelling and bruising inside
and outside the mouth
RECOGNITION
 ■ To protect the airway
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
Jaw fractures are usually the result of direct force, such as a
heavy blow to the chin. In some situations, a blow to one side
of the jaw produces indirect force, which causes a fracture on
the other side of the face. A fall onto the point of the chin can
fracture the jaw on both sides. The lower jaw may also be
dislocated by a blow to the face, or is sometimes dislocated
by yawning.
If the face is seriously injured, with the jaw fractured in more
than one place, treat as for a facial injury (opposite).
If the casualty is not
seriously injured, help him
sit with his head forward to
allow fluids to drain from his
mouth. Encourage the casualty
to spit out loose teeth, and keep
them to send to the hospital
with him.
1 Give the casualty a soft pad
to hold firmly against his
jaw in order to support it.
2
Arrange to take or send the
casualty to the hospital.
Keep his jaw supported
throughout.
3
CAUTION
148
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
SEE ALSO Fractures pp.136–38 | Upper arm injury p.150
 ■ To immobilize the injured shoulder
and arm
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
The collarbones (clavicles) form “struts” between the shoulder
blades and the top of the breastbone to help support the arms.
It is rare for a collarbone to be broken by a direct blow. Usually,
a fracture results from an indirect force transmitted from an
impact at the shoulder or passing along the arm, for example,
from a fall onto an outstretched arm. Collarbone fractures often
occur in young people as a result of sports activities. The broken
ends of the collarbone may be displaced, causing swelling and
bleeding in the surrounding tissues as well as distortion of
the shoulder.
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty sit down. Gently place the injured arm across
her body in the position that she finds most comfortable. Ask her
to support the elbow on the injured side with her other hand, or help
her do it.
Support the arm on the
affected side with an arm
sling (p.251). Make sure the knot
is clear of the site of injury.
For extra support, secure
the arm to the chest by
tying a broad-fold bandage
(p.249) around the chest and
the sling. Once the arm is
supported, the casualty will be
more comfortable.
2
1
3
COLLARBONE INJURY
There may be:
 ■ Pain and tenderness, increased
by movement
 ■ Swelling and deformity
of the shoulder
 ■ Attempts by the casualty to relax
muscles and relieve pain; she may
support her arm at the elbow, and
incline her head to her injured side
RECOGNITION
Arrange to take or send
the casualty to the hospital
in the position she finds most
comfortable.
4
CAUTION
149
COLLARBONE INJURY | SHOULDER INJURY
SHOULDER INJURY
 ■ To support and immobilize the
injured limb
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not attempt to replace a
dislocated bone into its socket.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
A fall onto the shoulder or an outstretched arm or a wrenching
force may pull the head of the upper arm bone (humerus) out
of the joint socket—dislocation of the shoulder. At the same
time, ligaments around the shoulder joint may be torn. This
injury can be very painful. Some people experience repeated
dislocations and may need a strengthening operation on the
affected shoulder.
A fall onto the point of the shoulder may damage the ligaments
that brace the collarbone at the shoulder. Other shoulder injuries
include damage to the joint capsule and to the tendons around
the shoulder; these injuries tend to be common in older people.
To treat a shoulder sprain, rest the affected part, cool the injury
with ice, and use a sling to provide comfortable support.
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty sit down.
Gently place the arm on
the injured side across her body
in the position that is most
comfortable. Ask the casualty to
support her elbow on the injured
side, or help her do it.
For extra support if
necessary, secure the arm
to the chest by tying a broadfold bandage (p.249) around the
chest and the sling.
Support the arm on the
injured side with an arm
sling (p.251).
Arrange to take or send
the casualty to the hospital
in the position she finds most
comfortable.
3
1 2
4
There may be:
 ■ Severe pain, increased by movement;
the pain may make the casualty
reluctant to move
 ■ Attempts by the casualty to relieve
pain by supporting the arm and
inclining the head to the injured side
 ■ A flat, angular look to the shoulder
RECOGNITION
SEE ALSO Fractures pp.136–38
CAUTION
150
There may be:
 ■ Pain, increased by movement
 ■ Tenderness and deformity over the
site of a fracture
 ■ Rapid swelling
 ■ Bruising, which may develop
more slowly
 ■ To immobilize the arm
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
A serious form of upper arm injury is a fracture of the long
bone in the upper arm (humerus). The bone may be fractured
across the center by a direct blow. However, it is much more
common, especially in elderly people, for the arm bone to break
at the shoulder end, usually in a fall.
A fracture at the top of the bone is usually a stable injury
(p.136) because the broken bone ends stay in place. For this
reason, it may not be immediately apparent that the bone
is broken, although the arm is likely to be painful. There is a
possibility that the casualty will cope with the pain and leave
the fracture untreated for some time.
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty sit down.
Remove all jewelry such as
bracelets, rings, and watches.
Gently place the forearm
horizontally across her body
in the position that is most
comfortable. Ask her to support
her elbow if possible.
Slide a triangular bandage
in position between the arm
and the chest, ready to make an
arm sling (p.251). Place soft
padding between the injured
arm and the body, then support
the arm and its padding in an
arm sling.
For extra support, or if
the trip to the hospital is
prolonged, secure the arm by
tying a broad-fold bandage
(p.249) around the chest and
over the sling; make sure that
the broad-fold bandage is below
the fracture site.
Arrange to take or send the
casualty to the hospital.
1 2 3
4
UPPER ARM INJURY
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
SEE ALSO Fractures pp.136–38
CAUTION
151
UPPER ARM INJURY | ELBOW INJURY
ELBOW INJURY
There may be:
 ■ Pain, increased by movement
 ■ Tenderness over the site of a fracture
 ■ Swelling, bruising, and deformity
 ■ Fixed elbow
 ■ To immobilize the arm without
further injury to the joint
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ If the casualty feels faint, help
her lie down.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ Do not try to move the
injured arm.
WHAT TO DO
If the elbow can be bent, treat as for upper arm injury opposite.
Remove all jewelry such as bracelets, rings, and watches.
If the casualty cannot bend her arm, help her sit down. Place
padding, such as a towel, around the elbow for comfort
and support.
Secure the arm in the most comfortable position for the casualty
using broad-fold bandages. Keep the bandages clear of the
fracture site.
Arrange to take or send the
casualty to the hospital.
Check the wrist pulse (p.53)
in the injured arm every ten
minutes until medical help arrives.
If you cannot feel a pulse, gently
undo the bandages and straighten
the arm until the pulse returns.
Support the arm in this position.
2
1
3
4
5
Fractures or dislocations at the elbow usually result from
a fall onto the hand. Children often fracture the upper arm bone
just above the elbow. This is an unstable fracture (p.136), and
the bone ends may damage blood vessels. Circulation in the
arm needs to be checked regularly. In any elbow injury, the elbow
will be stiff and difficult to straighten. Never try to force a
casualty to bend it.
SEE ALSO Fractures pp.136–38
CAUTION
152 SEE ALSO Fractures pp.136–38 | Severe external bleeding pp.114–15
There may be:
 ■ Pain, increased by movement
 ■ Swelling, bruising, and deformity
 ■ Possible bleeding with
 an open fracture
 ■ To immobilize the arm
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not allow the casualty to eat
or drink because an anesthetic
may be needed.
The bones of the forearm (radius and ulna) can be fractured by
an impact such as a heavy blow or a fall. Because the bones have
little fleshy covering, the broken ends may pierce the skin,
producing an open fracture (p.136).
A fall onto an outstretched hand can result in various types
of fractures of the wrist. One type, Colles fractures, commonly
occurs in elderly people.
The wrist joint is rarely dislocated but is often sprained.
It can be difficult to distinguish between a sprain and a
fracture, especially if the tiny scaphoid bone (at the base of
the thumb) is injured. If you are in any doubt about the injury
treat as a fracture.
WHAT TO DO
Ask the casualty to sit
down. Steady and support
the injured forearm and place it
across his body; ask the casualty
to support it if he can. Expose
and treat any wound, and
remove jewelry, especially
watches, bracelets, and rings.
For extra support, or if
the trip to the hospital is
likely to be prolonged, secure
the arm to the body by tying a
swathe (p.251) over the sling and
body. Position the bandage as
close to the elbow as you can.
Arrange to take or send the
casualty to the hospital.
Slide a triangular bandage
in position between the arm
and the chest, ready to make an
arm sling (p.251). Surround the
forearm in soft padding, such as
a small towel.
Support the arm and the
padding with an arm sling;
make sure the knot is tied on the
injured side.
4
2
1 3
FOREARM AND WRIST INJURIES
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
CAUTION
153
FOREARM AND WRIST INJURIES | HAND AND FINGER INJURIES
HAND AND FINGER INJURIES
SEE ALSO Crush injury p.118 | Dislocated joint p.139 | Fractures pp.136–38 | Wound to the palm p.127
There may be:
 ■ Pain, increased by movement
 ■ Swelling, bruising, and deformity
 ■ Possible bleeding with an
open fracture
 ■ To elevate the hand and
immobilize it
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not allow the casualty to
eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty sit
down and ask her to raise
and support the affected wrist
and hand; help her if necessary.
Treat any bleeding and losely
cover the wound with a sterile
dressing or large clean,
gauze pad.
For extra support, or if the
trip to the hospital is likely
to be prolonged, secure the arm
by tying a broad-fold bandage
(p.249) around the chest and
over the sling; keep it away from
the injury. Arrange to take or
send the casualty to the hospital.
Remove any rings, bracelets,
and watch before the hand
begins to swell, and keep it
raised to minimize swelling.
Wrap the hand in soft, nonfluffy
padding for extra protection.
Gently support the affected
arm across the casualty’s
body by placing it in an elevation
sling (p.252).
4
2
1 3
The bones and joints in the hand can suffer various types
of injury, such as fractures, cuts, and bruising. Minor fractures
are usually caused by direct force. A fracture of the knuckle
often results from a punch.
Multiple fractures, affecting many or all of the bones in the
hand, are usually caused by crushing injuries. The fractures
may be open, with bleeding and swelling, needing immediate
first aid treatment.
The joints in the fingers or thumb are sometimes dislocated
or sprained as a result of a fall onto the hand (for example, while
someone is skiing or ice skating).
Always compare the suspected fractured hand with the
uninjured hand because finger fractures result in deformities
that may not be immediately obvious.
CAUTION
154
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
SEE ALSO Abdominal wound p.128 | Penetrating chest wound pp.104–05 | Shock pp.112–13
 ■ To support the chest wall
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness, position him on
the ground, on his back with
his airway open. If he is not
breathing, begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87). If
he needs to be placed in the
recovery position, lay him on
his injured side to allow the lung
on the uninjured side to work
to its full capacity.
One or more ribs can be fractured by direct force to the chest
from a blow or a fall, or by a crush injury (p.118). If there is a
wound over the fracture, or if a broken rib pierces a lung, the
casualty’s breathing may be seriously impaired.
An injury to the chest can cause an area of fractured ribs
to become detached from the rest of the chest wall, producing
what is called a “flail-chest” injury. The detached area
moves inward when the casualty inhales, and outward as he
exhales. This so-called “paradoxical” breathing causes severe
breathing difficulties.
Fractures of the lower ribs may injure internal organs such as
the liver and spleen, and may cause internal bleeding.
RIB INJURY
 ■ Bruising, swelling, or a wound at the
fracture site
 ■ Pain at the site of injury
 ■ Pain on taking a deep breath
 ■ Shallow breathing
 ■ A wound over the fracture; you
may hear air being “sucked”
into chest cavity
 ■ Paradoxical breathing
 ■ Signs of internal bleeding (p.116) and
shock (pp.112–13)
RECOGNITION
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty sit down
and ask him to support the
arm on the injured side; help him
if necessary. For extra support
place the arm on the injured side
in a sling (pp.251–52).
1
Arrange to take or send the
casualty to the hospital. 2
If there is a penetrating wound, help
the casualty sit down on the floor,
leaning toward the injured side.
Cover and seal the wound on three
edges (pp.104–05). Support him
with cushions and place the arm
on the injured side in an elevation
sling (p.252). Call 911 for emergency
help. Monitor and record vital
signs—level of response, breathing,
and pulse (pp.52–53)—while waiting
for help to arrive.
CAUTION
SPECIAL CASE A PENETRATING CHEST WOUND
155
RIB INJURY | FRACTURED PELVIS
FRACTURED PELVIS
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ Keep movements of the casualty
to a minimum to prevent
worsening the injury.
 ■ Do not bandage the casualty’s
legs together if this increases
the pain. In such cases, only
surround the injured area with
soft padding, such as clothing
or towels.
SEE ALSO Fractures pp.136–38 | Internal bleeding p.116 | Shock pp.112–13
 ■ To minimize the risk of shock
 ■ To arrange urgent removal to
the hospital
YOUR AIMS
There may be:
 ■ An inability to walk or even stand,
although the legs appear uninjured
 ■ Pain and tenderness in the region of
the hip, groin, or back, which
increases with movement
 ■ Difficulty or pain when urinating, and
bloodstained clothing
 ■ Signs of shock and internal bleeding
RECOGNITION
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty lie down
on her back with her head
flat or low to minimize shock.
Keep her legs straight and flat
or, if it is more comfortable,
help her bend her knees
slightly and support them with
padding, such as a cushion
or folded clothing.
Call 911 for emergency
help. Treat the casualty for
shock (pp.112–13). Do not raise
the legs.
1 3
Place padding between the
bony points of her knees
and ankles. Immobilize her legs
by bandaging them together
with folded triangular bandages
(p.249); secure her feet and
ankles with a narrow-fold
bandage (1), and the knees with
a broad-fold bandage (2).
Monitor and record
vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53) —until help arrives.
2
4
Injuries to the pelvis are usually caused by indirect force, such
as a car crash, a fall from a height, or by crushing. These incidents
can force the head of the thigh bone (femur) through the hip
socket in the pelvis.
A fracture of the pelvic bones may also be complicated by
injury to tissues and organs inside the pelvis, such as the bladder
and the urinary passages. The bleeding from large organs and
blood vessels in the pelvis may be severe and lead to shock.
2
1
CAUTION
156
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
BACK PAIN
 ■ To relieve pain
YOUR AIM
If any of the following symptoms
or signs are present, call 911 for
emergency help:
 ■ Recent history of injury, such
as a traffic accident or fall from
a height
 ■ Other symptoms of illness,
such as fever, as well as
back pain
 ■ Numbness and tingling down
the back of both legs
 ■ Swelling or deformity along
the spine
 ■ Difficulty with bladder and/or
bowel control
Lower back pain is common and most adults may experience
it at some point in their lives. It may be acute (sudden onset)
or chronic (long term). It is usually caused by age-related
degenerative changes or results from minor injury affecting
muscles, ligaments, vertebrae, disks, or nerves. It may be the
result of heavy manual work, a fall, or a turning or twisting
movement. Serious conditions causing back pain are rare and
beyond the scope of first aid.
Most cases are simple muscular backaches, often in the lower
back. In some casualties, the pain may extend down one leg. This
is called sciatica and is caused by pressure on the nerve root (a
so-called "pinched nerve").
Back pain that results from more serious mechanisms of injury
may indicate spinal injury and requires investigation and
treatment (see Spinal injury, pp.157–59).
WHAT TO DO
For minor back pain, advise the casualty to stay active to
mobilize the injured area. Encourage him to return to normal
activity as soon as possible.
An adult casualty may take the recommended dose of
acetaminophen or ibuprofen tablets, or his own pain medicine. 2
1
 ■ Pain in the lower back following
lifting or manual work
 ■ Possible pain radiating down the
back of one leg with numbness or
tingling in the affected leg—sciatica
RECOGNITION
For disabling back pain with neurological symptoms
(pp.157–59), arrange transportation to a hospital. 3
CAUTION
SEE ALSO Fractures pp.136–38 | Spinal injury pp.157–59
157
Injuries to the spine can involve one or more parts of the
back and/or neck: the bones (vertebrae), the disks of tissue
that separate the vertebrae, the surrounding muscles, and
ligaments, or the spinal cord and the nerves that branch
off from it.
The most serious risk associated with spinal injury is
damage to the spinal cord. Such damage can cause loss of
power and/or sensation below the injured area. The spinal
cord or nerve roots can suffer temporary damage if they are
pinched by displaced or dislocated disks, or by fragments of
broken bone. If the cord is partly or completely severed,
damage may be permanent.
The most important indicator is the mechanism of the injury.
Suspect spinal injury if abnormal forces have been exerted on the
back or neck, and particularly if a casualty complains of any
changes in sensation or difficulties with movement. If the
incident involved violent forward or backward bending, or
twisting of the spine, you must assume that the casualty has a
spinal injury. You must take particular care to avoid unnecessary
movement of the head, neck, and spine at all times.
Although spinal cord injury may occur without any damage to
the vertebrae, spinal fracture greatly increases the risk. The areas
that are most vulnerable are the bones in the neck and those in
the lower back.
Any of the following incidents should alert you to a possible
spinal injury:
 ■ Falling from a height, such as a ladder
 ■ Falling awkwardly, for instance, while doing
gymnastics or bouncing on a trampoline
 ■ Diving into a shallow pool and hitting
the bottom
 ■ Falling from a horse or motorcycle
 ■ Football tackle or misplaced hit
 ■ Sudden deceleration in a motor vehicle
 ■ A heavy object falling across the back
 ■ Injury to the head or the face
When the vertebrae are damaged,
there may be:
 ■ Pain in the neck or back at the injury
site. This may be masked by other,
more painful, injuries.
 ■ Irregularity or twisting
in the normal curve of the spine
 ■ Tenderness and/or bruising in the
skin over the spine
When the spinal cord is damaged,
there may be:
 ■ Loss of control over limbs
movement may be weak or absent
 ■ Loss of sensation, or abnormal
sensations such as burning or
tingling; a casualty may tell you that
his limbs feel stiff, heavy, or clumsy
 ■ Loss of bladder and/or bowel control
 ■ Breathing difficulties
RECOGNITION
BACK PAIN | SPINAL INJURY
Spinal cord protection
The spinal cord is protected by the
bony vertebral (spinal) column. Nerves
branching from the cord emerge
between adjacent vertebrae.
Intervertebral
disk
Vertebra
Spinal cord
Nerve root
SPINAL INJURY
»
158
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
 ■ To prevent further injury
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not move the casualty
from the position in which
you found her unless she
is in immediate danger.
 ■ If the casualty has to be
moved, use the log-roll
technique (opposite).
Ask a helper to place rolledup blankets, towels, or items
of clothing on either side of the
casualty’s head and neck, while
you keep his head in the neutral
position. Continue to support the
casualty’s head until emergency
services take over, no matter
how long this may be.
Kneel or lie behind the casualty’s head. Rest your elbows on the
ground or on your knees to keep your arms steady. Grasp the
sides of the casualty’s head. Spread your fingers so that you do not
cover his ears, so he can hear you. Steady and support his head in this
neutral position, in which the head, neck, and spine are aligned.
3
2
SPINAL INJURY
Get your helper to monitor
and record vital signs—level
of response, breathing, and
pulse (pp.52–53)—while waiting
for help to arrive.
4
«
WHAT TO DO FOR A CONSCIOUS CASUALTY
Reassure the casualty and advise him not to move. Call 911 for
emergency help, or ask a helper to do this. 1
CAUTION
159
SPINAL INJURY
1
 ■ To maintain an open airway
 ■ To begin CPR if necessary
 ■ To prevent further spinal damage
 ■ To arrange urgent removal to
the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ If the casualty has to be moved
and you have help, use the logroll technique (below).
 ■ If you are alone and you need
to leave the casualty to call for
emergency help, and if the
casualty is unable to maintain
an open airway, you should place
her in the recovery position
(pp.64–65) before you leave her.
WHAT TO DO FOR AN UNCONSCIOUS CASUALTY
Kneel or lie behind the casualty’s head. Rest your elbows on the
ground or on your knees to keep your arms steady. Grasp the
sides of her head. Support her head so that her head, trunk, and legs
are in a straight line.
Check the casualty’s
breathing. If she is
breathing, continue to
support her head. Call 911
for emergency help or ask a
helper to do this.
Open the casualty’s airway using the jaw-thrust technique. Place
your fingertips at the angles of her jaw. Gently lift the jaw to open
the airway. Take care not to tilt the casualty’s neck.
If the casualty is not
breathing, begin CPR
(pp.66–67). If you need to turn
the casualty, use the log-roll
technique (below).
3
2
1
4 Monitor and record vital
signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse (pp.52–
53)—while waiting for help.
5
2
CAUTION
SPECIAL CASE LOG-ROLL TECHNIQUE
This technique should be
used to turn a casualty
who has a suspected spinal injury.
Position the casualty and rescuers
as shown, with the casualty’s arms
crossed over chest. The person
securing the head will give the
command to roll once everyone
is in proper position.
Direct your helpers to roll
the casualty in the agreedupon direction (in case she
vomits, for example). Keep the
casualty’s head, trunk, and legs
in a straight line at all times; the
upper leg should be supported in
a slightly raised position to keep
the spine straight.
160
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
SEE ALSO Dislocated joint p.139 | Fractures pp.136–38 | Internal bleeding p.116 | Shock pp.112–13
There may be:
 ■ Pain at the site of the injury
 ■ An inability to walk
 ■ Signs of shock
 ■ Shortening of the leg and turning
outward of the knee and foot
RECOGNITION
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ Do not raise the casualty’s
injured leg, even if she shows
signs of shock, because you may
cause further internal damage.
The most serious injury of the thighbone (femur) is a fracture.
It takes a considerable force, such as a car crash or a fall from
a height, to fracture the shaft of the femur. This is a serious
injury because the broken bone ends can pierce major blood
vessels, causing severe blood loss, and shock may result.
Fracture of the neck of the femur is common in elderly
people, particularly women, whose bones become less dense
and more brittle with age (osteoporosis). This fracture is usually
a stable injury in which the bone ends are impacted together.
The casualty may be able to walk with a fractured neck of the
femur for some time before the fracture is discovered. In the
hip joint, the most serious, although much less common, type
of injury is dislocation.
HIP AND THIGH INJURIES
 ■ To immobilize the limb
 ■ To arrange urgent removal to
the hospital
YOUR AIMS
2 3 5
6
4
7 1
SPECIAL CASE PREPARING FOR TRANSPORTATION
CAUTION
If the trip to the hospital is likely to be long and
rough, more sturdy support for the leg and feet will
be needed. Use a specially made malleable splint
or a long, solid object, such as a fence post or long
walking stick, which reaches from the armpit to the
foot. Place the splint against the injured side. Insert
padding between the casualty’s legs and between the
splint and her body. Tie the feet together with a
narrow-fold bandage (1). Secure the splint to the
body with broad-fold bandages in the following
order: at the chest (2), pelvis (3), knees (4), above
and below the fracture site (5 and 6), and at one extra
point (7). Do not bandage over the fracture site.
Once the casualty’s leg is fully immobilized, she
should be moved onto the stretcher using the log-roll
technique (p.159).
HIP AND THIGH INJURIES
161
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty lie down.
Ask a helper to gently
steady and support the injured
limb at the knee. For a hip
dislocation, place a pillow under
the knee if this makes the
casualty more comfortable.
If the ambulance is not expected to arrive
quickly, immobilize a femur fracture by
securing it to the uninjured leg. Gently bring the
uninjured leg alongside the injured one. Position a
narrow-fold bandage (p.249) at the ankles and feet
(1), then a broad-fold one at the knees (2). Add
additional bandages above (3) and below (4) the
fracture site. Place soft padding between the legs to
prevent the bony parts from rubbing. Secure the
bandages on the uninjured side.
Call 911 for emergency
help. If the ambulance is
expected to arrive quickly, keep
the leg supported in the same
position (rather than trying
to straighten it) until the
ambulance arrives.
Take any steps possible to treat the
casualty for shock (pp.112–13): insulate
her from the cold with blankets or clothing.
Do not raise her legs.
4
2
1
5
1 2
3
4
For a femur fracture, gently
straighten the casualty’s leg.
If necessary, realign the limb
(p.137). Support the limb at the
ankle while you straighten it;
pull gently in the line of the limb
until the ambulance arrives.
3
162
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
SEE ALSO Fractures pp.136–38 | Severe external bleeding pp.114–15 | Strains and sprains pp.140–41
There may be:
 ■ Localized pain
 ■ Swelling, bruising, and deformity of
the leg
 ■ An open wound
 ■ Inability to stand on the injured leg
RECOGNITION
 ■ Do not allow the casualty to eat
or drink because an anesthetic
may be needed.
 ■ Do not raise the casualty’s legs,
even if he shows signs of shock,
because you may cause further
internal damage.
Injuries to the lower leg include fractures of the shinbone (tibia)
and the fibula, as well as damage to the soft tissues (muscles,
ligaments, and tendons).
Fractures of the tibia are usually due to a heavy blow (for
example, from the bumper of a moving vehicle). Because there is
little flesh over the tibia, a fracture is more likely to produce a
wound. The fibula can be broken by the twisting forces that
sprain an ankle.
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty lie down, and gently steady and support the
injured leg. If there is a wound, carefully expose it and treat the
bleeding. Place a dressing over the wound to protect it.
Call 911 for emergency help. Support the injured leg with your
hands; hold the joints above and below the fracture site to
prevent any movement. Maintain support until the ambulance arrives.
2
1
LOWER LEG INJURIES
 ■ To immobilize the leg
 ■ To arrange transportation to
the hospital
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
LOWER LEG INJURY
163
Steady and support the injured leg by hand
at the knee and foot (not over the fracture
site) to prevent any movement. If there is a wound,
treat the bleeding and place a dressing over the
wound to protect it. Call 911 for emergency help.
Maintain support until the ambulance arrives.
If the ambulance is delayed, splint the injured
leg to the other leg—ask a helper to maintain
support while you secure bandages. Bring the
uninjured leg to the injured one. Position a narrowfold bandage (p.249) at the feet. Slide two broadfold bandages under both knees; leave one at the
knee (2) and slide the other down to just above the
fracture site (3). Insert padding between the lower
legs and tie the feet together (1). Then secure the
other two bandages (2 then 3). Tie all knots on the
uninjured side.
If the ambulance is delayed, support the injured
leg by splinting it to the other leg. Bring the
uninjured leg alongside the injured one and slide
bandages under both legs. Position a narrow-fold
bandage (p.249) at the feet and ankles (1), then
broad-fold bandages at the knees (2) and above and
below the fracture site (3 and 4). Insert padding
between the lower legs. Tie a figure-eight bandage
around the feet and ankles, then secure the other
bandages, knotting them on the uninjured side.
If the casualty’s trip to the hospital is likely to
be long and rough, place soft padding on the
outside of the injured leg, from the knee to the foot.
Secure the legs with broad-fold bandages as
described above.
1 2
3
4
1 3 4 2
1
3 2
SPECIAL CASE IF THE FRACTURE IS NEAR THE ANKLE
164
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
SEE ALSO Strains and sprains pp.140–41
 ■ To protect the knee in the most
comfortable position
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not attempt to straighten
the knee forcibly. Displaced
cartilage or internal bleeding
may make it impossible to
straighten the knee joint safely.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to walk.
The knee is the hinge joint between the thighbone (femur) and
shinbone (tibia). It is capable of bending, straightening, and, in
the bent position, slight rotation.
The knee joint is supported by strong muscles and ligaments
and is protected at the front by a disk of bone called the kneecap
(patella). Disks of cartilage protect the end surfaces of the major
bones. Direct blows, violent twists, or sprains can damage these
structures. Possible knee injuries include fracture or dislocation
of the patella, sprains, and damage to the cartilage.
A knee injury may make it impossible for the casualty to bend
the joint, and you should ensure that the casualty does not try to
walk on the injured leg. Bleeding or fluid in the knee joint may
cause marked swelling around the knee.
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty lie down, preferably on a blanket to insulate
him from the floor or ground. Place soft padding, such as pillows,
blankets, or coats, under his injured knee to support it in the most
comfortable position.
Apply an ice pack, then wrap soft padding around the joint.
Secure padding with a roller bandage that extends from the
middle of the lower leg to mid-thigh.
Call 911 for emergency help. The casualty needs to remain
in the treatment position, so he should be transported to the
hospital by ambulance.
2
1
3
KNEE INJURY
There may be:
 ■ Pain on attempting to move
the knee
 ■ Swelling at the knee joint
RECOGNITION
CAUTION
165
KNEE INJURY | ANKLE INJURY
ANKLE INJURY
SEE ALSO Strains and sprains pp.140–41 | Lower leg injury pp.162–63
 ■ To relieve pain and swelling
 ■ To obtain medical aid if necessary
YOUR AIMS
 ■ If the casualty has pain and
swelling in the bony areas of
the ankle, suspect a break.
Secure and support the lower
leg as described for fracture
near the ankle (p.163) and
arrange to take or send him to
the hospital.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
A sprain is the most common ankle injury. It is usuallly caused
by a twist to the ankle and can be treated using the RICE
procedure (pp.140–41):
 ■ Rest the affected part
 ■ Cool the injury with Ice
 ■ Provide comfortable Compression support with elastic
bandaging
 ■ Elevate the injury
If the casualty cannot bear any weight on the injured leg or there
is severe pain, swelling, and/or deformity at the ankle, suspect a
break and treat it as a fracture of the lower leg near the ankle
(p.163). Be aware too, however, that a casualty may have a
fracture and still be able to walk and move his toes. If you are in
any doubt about an ankle injury, treat it as a fracture.
WHAT TO DO
Support the ankle in the most comfortable position for the
casualty, preferably raised.
Apply comfortable support to the ankle. Leave
the cold compress in place or wrap a layer of
soft padding around the area. Bandage the ankle
with a support bandage that extends from the base
of the foot to the upper extent of the pain.
Apply a cold compress, such as an ice pack or a cold pad (p.241),
to the site to reduce swelling and bruising.
Raise and support the injured limb. Check the
circulation beyond the bandaging (p.243) every
ten minutes. If the circulation is impaired, loosen the
bandage. If you suspect a broken bone, arrange to
send the casualty to the hospital.
3
2
1
4
 ■ Pain, increased either by movement
or by putting weight on the foot
 ■ Swelling at the site of injury
RECOGNITION
CAUTION
166
BONE, JOINT, AND MUSCLE INJURIES
SEE ALSO Crush injury p.118
 ■ To minimize swelling
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not allow the casualty
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
The bones and joints in the foot can suffer various types of
injury, such as fractures and dislocations, cuts, and bruising.
Minor fractures are usually caused by direct force. Always
compare the injured foot with the uninjured foot, especially toes,
because fractures can result in deformities that may not be
immediately obvious. Multiple fractures, affecting many or all of
the bones in the foot, are usually caused by crushing injuries.
These fractures may be open, with severe bleeding and swelling,
needing immediate first aid treatment. Serious foot and toe
injures must be treated in the hospital.
FOOT AND TOE INJURIES
 ■ Difficulty in walking
 ■ Stiffness of movement
 ■ Bruising and swelling
 ■ Deformity
RECOGNITION
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty lie down, and carefully
steady and support the injured leg. If there is a
wound, carefully expose it and treat the bleeding.
Place a dressing over the wound to protect it.
Remove any foot jewelry before the area
begins to swell. 2
1
Apply a cold compress, such as an ice pack or a
cold pad (p.241). This will also help relieve
swelling and reduce pain.
3
Arrange to take or send the casualty to the
hospital. If he is not being transported by
ambulance, try to ensure that the injured foot
remains elevated during travel.
5
Place padding around the casualty’s foot and
bandage the ice pack firmly in place. 4
CAUTION
167
FOOT AND TOE INJURIES | CRAMPS
CRAMPS
SEE ALSO Dehydration p.182 | Heat exhaustion p.184
 ■ To relieve the spasm
and pain
This condition is a sudden painful spasm in one or more muscles. YOUR AIM
Cramps commonly occur during sleep. They can also develop after
strenuous exercise, due to a buildup of chemical waste products in
the muscles, or to excessive loss of salts and fluids from the body
through sweating or dehydration. Cramps can often be relieved by
stretching and massaging the affected muscles.
Cramp in the foot
Help the casualty stand with his weight on the front
of his foot; you can also rest the foot on your knee
to stretch the affected muscles. Once the spasm has
passed, massage the affected part of the foot with
your fingers.
Cramp in the calf muscles
Help the casualty straighten his knee, and support his
foot. Flex his foot upward toward his shin to stretch
the calf muscles, then massage the affected area on
the back of the calf.
Cramp in the front of the thigh
Help the casualty lie down. Raise the leg and bend the
knee to stretch the muscles. Massage the affected
muscles once the spasm has passed.
Cramp in the back of the thigh
Help the casualty lie down. Raise the leg and
straighten the knee to stretch the muscles. Massage
the area once the spasm has passed.
This chapter deals with the effects
of injuries and illnesses caused by
environmental factors such as extremes
of heat and cold.
The skin protects the body and helps
maintain body temperature within a
normal range. It can be damaged by fire,
hot liquids, or caustic substances. This
chapter contains advice on how to assess
burns, whether minor or severe.
The effects of temperature extremes
can also impair skin and other body
functions. Injuries may be localized—
such as frostbite or sunburn—or
generalized, as in heat exhaustion or
hypothermia. Young children and the
elderly are most susceptible to problems
caused by extremes of temperature.
 ■ To assess the casualty’s condition quickly and calmly.
 ■ To comfort and reassure the casualty.
 ■ To call 911 for emergency help if you suspect a serious
illness or injury.
 ■ To be aware of your own needs.
For burns:
 ■ To protect yourself and the casualty from danger;
 ■ To assess the burn, prevent further damage, and
relieve symptoms.
For extremes of temperature:
 ■ To protect the casualty from heat or cold.
 ■ To restore normal body temperature.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
EFFECTS OF
HEAT AND COLD
170
EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD
THE SKIN
One of the largest organs, the skin plays key
roles in protecting the body from injury and
infection and in maintaining the body at a
constant temperature.
The skin consists of two layers of tissue—an
outer layer (epidermis) and an inner layer
(dermis)—that lie on a layer of fatty tissue
(subcutaneous fat). The top part of the epidermis
is made up of dead, flattened skin cells, which are
constantly shed and replaced by new cells made
in the lower part of this layer. The epidermis is
protected by an oily substance called sebum—
secreted from glands called sebaceous glands—
which keeps the skin supple and waterproof.
The lower layer of the skin, the dermis, contains
the blood vessels, nerves, muscles, sebaceous
glands, sweat glands, and hair roots (follicles). The
ends of sensory nerves within the dermis register
sensations from the body’s surface, such as heat,
cold, pain, and even the slightest touch. Blood
vessels supply the skin with nutrients and help
regulate body temperature by preserving or
releasing heat (opposite).
Structure of the skin
The skin is made up of two layers: the thin, outer
epidermis and the thicker dermis beneath it. Most
of the structures of the skin, such as blood vessels,
nerves, and hair roots, are contained within the dermis.
Hair follicle
Pore releases sweat
at the skin surface
Erector pili muscle
contracts to pull the
hair upright
Hair
Tiny structures called
papillae form the
junction between the
dermis and epidermis
Nerve
Epidermis
Dermis
Layer of
fatty tissue
Nerve ending
Sweat gland
secretes sweat onto
the skin surface
Sebaceous gland
produces oily
secretion (sebum)
Arteriole supplies
oxygenated blood
Venule carries
away waste
171
THE SKIN
One of the major functions of the skin is to
help maintain the body temperature within
its optimum range of 97–99°F (36–37°C). A
structure in the brain called the hypothalamus
regulates body temperature. If the temperature
of blood passing through this thermostat falls
or rises to a level outside the optimum range,
various mechanisms are activated to either
warm or cool the body as necessary.
HOW THE BODY KEEPS WARM
When the body becomes too cold, changes take
place to prevent heat from escaping. Blood
vessels at the body surface narrow (constrict)
to keep warm blood in the main part (core) of
the body. The activity of the sweat glands is
reduced, and hairs stand on end to “trap” warm
air close to the skin. In addition to the
mechanisms that prevent heat loss, other
body systems act to produce more warmth.
The rate of metabolism is increased. Heat is
also generated by muscle activity, which may
be either voluntary (for example, during
physical exercise) or, in cold conditions,
involuntary (shivering).
HOW THE BODY LOSES HEAT
In hot conditions, the body activates a number
of mechanisms to encourage heat loss and thus
prevent the body temperature from becoming
too high. Blood vessels that lie in or just under
the skin widen (dilate). As a result, blood flow to
the body surface increases and more heat is
lost. In addition, the sweat glands become more
active and secrete more sweat. This sweat then
cools the skin as it evaporates.
MAINTAINING BODY TEMPERATURE
How skin responds to low body
temperature
Blood vessels narrow (constrict) to reduce
blood flow to the skin. The erector pili
muscles contract, making the hairs stand
upright and trap warm air close to the skin.
How skin responds to high body
temperature
Blood vessels widen (dilate), making the
skin appear flushed, and heat is lost. Sweat
glands become active and produce sweat
droplets, which evaporate and cool the skin.
Constricted
blood vessel Dilated blood vessel Contracted erector
pili muscle Sweat
gland
“Goose pimple”
Sweat droplet
Erect hair
Hair
Relaxed erector
pili muscle
Dermis
Layer of
fatty tissue
Epidermis
172
EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD
ASSESSING A BURN
When skin is damaged by burning, it can no
longer function effectively as a natural barrier
against infection. In addition, body fluid may be
lost because tiny blood vessels in the skin leak
tissue fluid (serum). This fluid either collects
under the skin to form blisters or leaks through
the surface.
There may be related injuries, significant fluid
loss, and infection may develop later.
WHAT TO ASSESS
It is particularly important to consider
the circumstances in which the burn has
occurred; whether or not the airway is likely to
have been affected; and the extent, location,
and depth of the burn.
There are many possible causes of burns
(below). By establishing the cause of the burn,
you may be able to identify any other potential
problems that could result. For example, a fire in
an enclosed space is likely to have produced
poisonous carbon monoxide gas, or other toxic
fumes may have been released if burning
material was involved. If the casualty’s airway
has been affected, he may have difficulty
breathing and will need urgent medical
attention and admission to the hospital.
The extent of the burn will also indicate
whether or not shock is likely to develop. Shock is
a life-threatening condition and occurs whenever
there is a serious loss of body fluids (p.116). In a
burn that covers a large area of the body, fluid
loss will be significant and the risk of shock high.
If the burn is on a limb, fluid may collect in the
tissues around it, causing swelling and pain. This
buildup of fluid is particularly serious if the limb
is constricted, for example by clothing
or footwear.
Burns allow germs to enter the skin
and therefore carry a serious risk of infection.
■ Flames ■ Contact with hot objects, such as domestic appliances
or cigarettes
Dry burn
TYPE OF BURN CAUSES
Scald
Electrical burn
Radiation burn
Chemical burn
Cold injury
■ Steam ■ Hot liquids, such as tea and coffee, or hot oil
■ Low-voltage current, as used by domestic appliances
■ High-voltage currents, as carried in overhead or underground cables
■ Lightning strikes
■ Sunburn ■ Overexposure to ultraviolet rays from a sunlamp
■ Exposure to a radioactive source, such as an X-ray
■ Industrial chemicals, including inhaled fumes and corrosive gases
■ Domestic chemicals and agents, such as paint stripper, caustic soda, weed killers,
bleach, oven cleaner, or any other strong acid or alkali chemical
■ Frostbite ■ Contact with freezing metals
■ Contact with freezing vapors, such as liquid oxygen or liquid nitrogen
TYPES OF BURN AND POSSIBLE CAUSES
173
ASSESSING A BURN
Burns are classified according to the depth
of skin damage. There are three depths:
superficial, partial-thickness, and fullthickness. A casualty may suffer one or more
depths of burn in a single incident.
A superficial burn involves only the
outermost layer of skin, the epidermis. It
usually heals well if first aid is given promptly
and if blisters do not form. Sunburn is one of
the most common types of superficial burn.
Other causes include minor domestic
incidents. Partial-thickness burns are very
painful. They destroy the epidermis and cause
the skin to become red and blistered. They
usually heal well, but if they affect more than
20 percent of the body in an adult and 10
percent in a child, they can be life-threatening.
In full-thickness burns, pain sensation is lost,
which masks the severity of the injury. The skin
may look waxy, pale, or charred and needs urgent
medical attention. There are likely to be areas of
partial and superficial burns around them.
DEPTH OF BURNS
If the casualty is a child, seek medical advice or
take the child to the hospital, however small the
burn appears. For adults, medical attention
should be sought for any serious burn. Such
burns include:
 ■ All partial-thickness burns larger than
10 percent of the total body surface area
 ■ All burns involving the face, hands, feet,
genitals and genital area, or major joints
 ■ All full-thickness burns
 ■ Electrical burns, including lightning injury
 ■ Chemical burns
 ■ Inhalation injury
 ■ Casualties with preexisting medical
disorders that could complicate treatment
 ■ Casualties with trauma as well as burns
 ■ Casualties who will require social, emotional,
or rehabilitative treatment
If you are unsure about the severity of any burn,
seek medical advice.
BURNS THAT REQUIRE HOSPITAL TREATMENT
Superficial burn
This type of burn involves
only the outermost layer of
skin. Superficial burns are
characterized by redness,
swelling, and tenderness.
Partial-thickness burn
This affects the epidermis, and
the skin becomes red and raw.
Blisters form over the skin due
to fluid released from the damaged
tissues beneath.
Full-thickness burn
With this type of burn, all the layers
of the skin are affected; there may
be some damage to nerves, fat
tissue, muscles, and blood vessels.
Burn Tissue fluid Blister Damaged tissues
174
EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD
SEVERE BURNS AND SCALDS
SEE ALSO Burns to the airway p.177 | Fires pp.32–33 | Shock pp.112–13
There may be:
 ■ Possible areas of superficial, partial
thickness, and/or full-thickness burns
 ■ Pain
 ■ Difficulty breathing
 ■ Signs of shock (pp.112–13)
 ■ To stop the burning and relieve pain
 ■ To maintain an open airway
 ■ To treat associated injuries
 ■ To minimize the risk of infection
 ■ To minimize the risk of shock
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
 ■ To gather information for the
emergency services
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not remove anything
sticking to the burn; you may
cause further damage and
introduce infection into the
burned area.
 ■ Do not burst any blisters.
 ■ Do not apply any lotion or
ointment to the burned area;
it may damage tissues and
increase the risk of infection.
 ■ The use of specialized dressings,
sprays, and gels to cool burns is
not recommended.
 ■ Do not use adhesive dressings
or apply adhesive tape to the
skin; a burn may be more
extensive than it first appears.
 ■ If the casualty has a burn on his
face, do not cover the injury—
you could cause the casualty
distress and obstruct the airway.
 ■ Do not allow the casualty to eat
or drink because he may need
an anesthetic.
Take great care when treating thermal burns that are deep or
extensive. The longer the burning continues, the more severe the
injury will be. If the casualty has been injured in a fire, assume
that smoke or hot air has also affected his airway and/or lungs.
Your priorities are to cool the burn (which stops the burning
process and relieves the pain) and to monitor his breathing. A
casualty with a severe burn or scald injury will almost certainly
be suffering from shock because of the fluid loss and will need
urgent hospital treatment.
The possibility of nonaccidental injury must always be
considered, no matter what the age of the casualty. Keep an
accurate record of what has happened and any treatment you
have given. If you have to remove or cut away clothing, keep
it in case of future investigation.
WHAT TO DO
Start cooling the burn as soon as possible after the injury
occurred. Flood the burn with plenty of cool tap water, but do
not delay removal of the casualty to the hospital. Help the casualty sit
or lie down. If possible, try to prevent the burned area from coming
into contact with the ground.
Call 911 for emergency help; if possible, get someone to do this
while you cool the burn.
1
2
CAUTION
175
SEVERE BURNS AND SCALDS
Continue cooling the affected area for at least ten minutes, or
until the pain is relieved. Watch for signs of breathing difficulty.
Do not overcool the casualty because you may lower the body
temperature to a dangerous level. This is a particular hazard for babies
and elderly people.
Do not touch or otherwise interfere with the burn. Gently
remove rings, watches, belts, shoes, and burned or or smoldering
clothing before the tissues begin to swell. A helper can do this while
you are cooling the burn. Do not remove clothing that is stuck to
the burn.
When the burn is cooled, cover the injured area with plastic wrap
to protect it from infection. Discard the first two turns from the
roll and then wrap it lengthwise over the burn. A clean plastic bag can
be used to cover a hand or foot; secure it with a bandage or adhesive
tape applied over the plastic, not the damaged skin. If there is no
plastic wrap available, use a sterile nonstick dressing, or improvise
with gauze. Apply any dressing very loosely.
Reassure the casualty and treat him for shock (pp.112–13) if
necessary. Record details of the casualty’s injuries. Monitor
and record his vital signs—level of response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—while waiting for emergency help to arrive.
4
3
5
6
176
EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD
MINOR BURNS AND SCALDS
 ■ Reddened skin
 ■ Pain in the area of the burn
Later there may be:
 ■ Blistering of the affected skin
 ■ To stop the burning
 ■ To relieve pain and swelling
 ■ To minimize the risk of infection
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
Small, superficial burns and scalds are often due to domestic
incidents, such as touching a hot iron or oven rack. Most minor
burns can be treated successfully by first aid and will heal
naturally. However, you should advise the casualty to seek
medical advice if you are at all concerned about the severity of
the injury (Assessing a burn, pp.172–73).
After a burn, blisters may form. These thin “bubbles” are
caused by tissue fluid leaking into the burned area just beneath
the skin’s surface. You should never break a blister caused by a
burn because you may introduce infection into the wound.
WHAT TO DO
Flood the injured part
with cold water for at least
ten minutes or until the pain
is relieved. If water is not
available, any cold, harmless
liquid, such as milk, can
be used.
Take or send the casualty to
the hospital if the casualty is
a child, or if you are in any doubt
about the casualty’s condition.
Gently remove any
jewelry, watches, belts, or
constricting clothing from the
injured area before it begins
to swell.
When the burn is cooled,
cover it with plastic wrap or
place a clean plastic bag over a
foot or hand. Apply the wrap
lengthwise over the burn, not
around the limb because the
tissues swell. If you do not have
plastic wrap or a plastic bag, use a
sterile dressing or a gauze pad,
bandaged loosely in place.
4
2
1
3
 ■ Do not break blisters or
otherwise interfere with
the injured area.
 ■ Do not apply adhesive dressings
or adhesive tape to the skin
because removing them may
tear damaged skin.
 ■ Do not apply any ointments
other than antibiotic ones
such as bacitracin—they may
damage tissues.
 ■ The use of specialized dressings,
sprays, and gels to cool burns is
not recommended.
 ■ Do not put blister bandages on
blisters caused by a burn.
Never burst a blister; they
usually need no treatment.
However, if a blister breaks or is
likely to burst, cover it with a
nonadhesive sterile dressing that
extends well beyond the edges
of the blister. Leave the dressing
in place until the blister subsides.
SPECIAL CASE BLISTERS
SEE ALSO Assessing a burn pp.172–73
CAUTION
177
MINOR BURNS AND SCALDS | BURNS TO THE AIRWAY
BURNS TO THE AIRWAY
SEE ALSO Hypoxia p.92 | Shock pp.112–13 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
There may be:
 ■ Soot around the nose or mouth
 ■ Singeing of the nasal hairs
 ■ Redness, swelling, or actual burning
of the tongue
 ■ Damage to the skin around
the mouth
 ■ Hoarseness of the voice
 ■ Breathing difficulties
 ■ To maintain an open airway
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
WHAT TO DO
Call 911 for emergency help. Tell the dispatcher that you suspect
burns to the casualty’s airway.
Reassure the casualty. Monitor and record vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)—while waiting for
help to arrive.
Take any steps possible to improve the casualty’s air supply, such
as loosening clothing around his neck.
Offer the casualty ice or small sips of cold water to reduce
swelling and pain.
4
2
1
3
Any burn to the face, mouth, or throat is very serious because
the air passages may become swollen. Usually, signs of burning,
such as soot or singed nasal hairs, is evident. Suspect damage to
the airway if a casualty sustains burns in a confined space—he is
likely to have inhaled hot air or gases.
There is no specific first aid treatment for an extreme case of
burns to the airway; the swelling will rapidly block the airway,
and there is a serious risk of hypoxia. Immediate and specialized
medical help is required.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness, open the airway
and check breathing (The
unconscious casualty pp.54–87).
CAUTION
178
EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD
ELECTRICAL BURN
SEE ALSO Electrical incidents pp.34–35 | Severe burns and scalds pp.174–75 | Shock pp.112–13 |
The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
There may be:
 ■ Unconsciousness
 ■ Full-thickness burns, with swelling,
scorching, and charring
 ■ Burns at points of entry and exit
of electricity
 ■ Signs of shock (pp.112–13)
 ■ To treat the burns and shock
 ■ To arrange urgent removal to
the hospital
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not approach a casualty of
high-voltage electricity until
you are officially told that the
current has been switched off
(pp.34–35).
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing normally, begin CPR
with chest compressions
(pp.54–87).
Burns may occur when electricity passes through the body.
There may be surface damage along the point of contact, or
at the points of entry and exit of the current. In addition, there
may also be internal damage between the entry and exit points;
the position and direction of wounds will alert you to the likely
site and extent of hidden injury.
Burns may be caused by a lightning strike or by a low- or highvoltage electric current. Electric shock can cause cardiac arrest.
If the casualty is unconscious, your priority, once the area is safe,
is to open his airway and check his breathing, and begin CPR
immediately if needed.
WHAT TO DO
Gently remove any jewelry, watches, belts, or constricting
clothing from the injured area before it begins to swell. Do not
touch the burn.
Make sure that contact with the electrical source is broken before
you touch the casualty (pp.34–35).
Flood the injury with cold
water (at the entry and exit
points if both are present) for at
least ten minutes or until pain is
relieved. If water is not available,
any cold, harmless liquid can
be used.
When the burn is cooled,
place a clean plastic bag
over a burn on a foot or hand,
taping the bag loosely in place
(attach tape to the bag, not the
skin). Or, cover the burn with
plastic wrap, laying it along the
length of the limb so that it does
not become too tight. If neither is
available, use a sterile dressing or
a clean gauze pad loosely.
Call 911 for emergency help. Reassure the casualty and treat
him for shock (pp.112–13). Monitor and record vital signs—level
of response, breathing and pulse (pp.52–53)—while waiting for
help to arrive.
3
1
2
4
5
CAUTION
179
ELECTRICAL BURN | CHEMICAL BURN
CHEMICAL BURN
SEE ALSO Chemical burn to the eye p.180 | Inhalation of fumes pp.98–99
There may be:
 ■ Evidence of chemicals in
the vicinity
 ■ Intense, stinging pain
Later:
 ■ Discoloration, blistering,
and peeling
 ■ Swelling of the affected area
 ■ To make the area safe and inform the
relevant authority
 ■ To disperse the harmful chemical
 ■ To arrange transportation to
the hospital
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Never attempt to neutralize acid
or alkali burns unless trained to
do so.
 ■ Do not delay starting treatment
by searching for an antidote.
 ■ If the incident occurs in
the workplace, notify the
safety officer and/or
emergency services.
WHAT TO DO
Make sure that the area around the casualty is safe. Ventilate the
area to disperse fumes. Wear protective gloves to prevent you
from coming into contact with the chemical. If it is safe to do so, seal
the chemical container. Move the casualty if necessary. If the chemical
is in powder form, it can be brushed off the skin.
Arrange to take or send
the casualty to the hospital.
Monitor vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—while waiting for
medical help. Pass on details of
the chemical to medical staff if
you can identify it.
Flood the burn with water for at least 20 minutes to disperse the
chemical and stop the burning. If treating a casualty lying on the
ground, ensure that the contaminated water does not collect
underneath her. Pour water away from yourself to avoid being splashed.
Gently remove any
contaminated clothing
while flooding the injury.
4
1
3
Certain chemicals may irritate, burn, or penetrate the skin,
causing widespread and sometimes fatal damage. Most strong,
corrosive chemicals are found in industry, but chemical burns can
also occur in the home; for instance from dishwasher products
(the most common cause of alkali burns in children), oven
cleaners, pesticides, and paint stripper.
Chemical burns are always serious, and the casualty will need
urgent hospital treatment. If possible, note the name or brand of
the burning substance. Before treating the casualty, ensure the
safety of yourself and others because some chemicals give off
poisonous fumes, causing breathing difficulties.
2
CAUTION
180
EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD
CHEMICAL BURN TO THE EYE
Splashes of chemicals in the eye can cause serious injury if not
treated quickly. Some chemicals damage the surface of the eye,
resulting in scarring and even blindness.
Your priority is to wash out (irrigate) the eye so that the
chemical is diluted and dispersed. When irrigating the eye, be
careful that the contaminated rinsing water does not splash you
or the casualty. Before beginning to treat the casualty, put on
protective gloves if available.
WHAT TO DO
Put on protective gloves. Hold the casualty’s affected eye under
gently running cold water for at least ten minutes. Irrigate the
eyelid thoroughly both inside and out; if the casualty’s eye is shut in a
spasm of pain, gently, but firmly, try to pull the eyelid open.
Arrange to take or send the
casualty to the hospital.
Identify the chemical if possible
and pass on details to the
medical staff.
Make sure that contaminated water does not splash the
uninjured eye. You may find it easier to pour the water over the
eye using an eye irrigator or a glass.
Ask the casualty to hold
a clean gauze pad over
the injured eye. If it will be some
time before the casualty receives
medical attention, bandage the
pad loosely in position.
4
2
1
3
There may be:
 ■ Intense pain in the eye
 ■ Inability to open the injured eye
 ■ Redness and swelling around
the eye
 ■ Copious watering of the eye
 ■ Evidence of chemical substances or
containers in the immediate area
 ■ To disperse the harmful chemical
 ■ To arrange transportation to
the hospital
 ■ Do not allow the casualty to
touch the injured eye.
 ■ Remove a contact lens only if
it slips out easily.
 ■ If the incident occurs in
the workplace, notify the
safety officer and/or
emergency services.
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
181
CHEMICAL BURN TO THE EYE | FLASH BURN TO THE EYE | INCAPACITANT SPRAY EXPOSURE
FLASH BURN TO THE EYE
SEE ALSO Allergy p.222 | Asthma p.102
WHAT TO DO
Move the casualty to a well-ventilated area with a free flow of air
to ensure rapid dispersal of the spray.
Put on gloves if you are handling contaminated items such as
clothing. Advise the casualty to remove contact lenses—he may
need help. Remove wet clothing and put it in a sealed plastic bag.
If necessary, the casualty may wash his skin with soap and
water, paying particular attention to skin folds and ears.
Showering may release spray particles trapped in the hair and
cause transient irritation.
2
1
3
This condition occurs when the surface (cornea) of the eye is
damaged by exposure to ultraviolet light, such as prolonged
glare from sunlight reflected off snow. Symptoms usually develop
gradually, and recovery can take up to a week. Flash burns can
also be caused by glare from a welder’s torch.
 ■ Intense pain in the affected eye(s)
There may also be:
 ■ A “gritty” feeling in the eye(s)
 ■ Sensitivity to light
 ■ Redness and watering of the eye(s)
 ■ To prevent further damage
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
 ■ Do not remove the casualty's
contact lenses.
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
Reassure the
casualty. Ask him
to hold an eye pad against
each injured eye. If it is
likely to take some time
to obtain medical
attention, lightly bandage
the pad(s) in place.
Arrange to take or
send the casualty to
the hospital.
2
1
There are two types of incapacitant spray—CS spray and
pepper spray. Both sprays are used by police forces for riot
control and self-protection, and both have been used by
unauthorized people as weapons in assault situations. They are
both aerosols and have the same effects. The effects usually wear
off 15–20 minutes after a person has been exposed to the spray.
There may be:
 ■ Burning sensation and watering of
the eyes
 ■ Sneezing and runny nose
 ■ Stinging sensation on the skin with
redness and possibly blistering
 ■ Difficulty breathing
 ■ To remove the casualty from the
spray area
 ■ If the casualty suffers from
asthma, the spray may trigger
an attack.
 ■ If the casualty’s symptoms
persist, seek medical advice.
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIM
INCAPACITANT SPRAY EXPOSURE
WHAT TO DO
CAUTION
CAUTION
182
EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD
DEHYDRATION
This condition occurs when the amount of fluids lost from the
body is not adequately replaced. Dehydration can begin to
develop when a person loses as little as one percent of his body
weight through fluid loss. A loss of two to six percent of his
body weight can occur during a typical period of exercise on a
warm day. The average daily intake of fluids is 4 pints (2.5 liters);
this fluid loss needs to be replaced. In addition to fluid, the body
loses essential body salts through sweating.
Dehydration is primarily the result of: excessive sweating
during sporting activities, especially in hot weather; prolonged
exposure to sun, or hot, humid conditions; sweating through
raised body temperature during a fever; and loss of fluid through
severe diarrhea and vomiting. Young children, older people, or
those involved in prolonged periods of activity are particularly at
risk. Severe dehydration can cause muscle cramps through the
loss of body salts.
The aim of first aid is to replace the lost water and salts
through rehydration. Water is usually sufficient but oral
rehydration solutions can help replace lost salt.
SEE ALSO Cramps p.167 | Heat exhaustion p.184
WHAT TO DO
Reassure the casualty. Help
him sit down.
Give him plenty of fluids
to drink. Water is usually
sufficient but oral rehydration
solutions can help with salt
replacement.
1
2
If the casualty is suffering
from a cramp, stretch
and massage the affected
muscles (p.167). Advise the
casualty to rest.
Monitor and record the
casualty’s condition. If he
remains unwell, seek medical
advice right away.
3
4
There may be:
 ■ Dry mouth and dry eyes
 ■ Dry and/or cracked lips
 ■ Headaches (light-headedness)
 ■ Dizziness and confusion
 ■ Dark urine
 ■ Reduction in the amount of
urine passed
 ■ Cramp, with a feeling of tightness
in the most used muscles, such
as the calves
 ■ In babies and young children, pale
skin with sunken eyes. In young
babies the soft spot on the head
(the fontanelle) may be sunken
 ■ To replace the lost body fluids
and salts
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIM
183
DEHYDRATION | SUNBURN
Overexposure to the sun or a sunlamp can result in sunburn. At
high altitudes, sunburn can occur even on an overcast summer’s
day, or in the snow. Some medicines can trigger severe sensitivity
to sunlight. Rarely, skin burns can be caused by exposure
to radioactivity.
Sunburn can be prevented by staying in the shade, wearing
protective clothing, and regularly applying high sun protection
factor sunscreen or sun block.
Most sunburn is superficial; in severe cases, the skin
is lobster-red and blistered. In addition, the casualty may suffer
from heat exhaustion or heatstroke.
Cover the casualty’s skin
with light clothing or a
towel. Help her move out of the
sun or, if at all possible, indoors.
Encourage the casualty
to have frequent sips of
 cold water. Cool the affected skin
by dabbing with cold water. If the
area is extensive, the casualty may
prefer to soak the affected skin in
a cold bath for ten minutes.
If the burns are mild,
calamine or an after-sun
lotion may soothe them. Advise
the casualty to stay inside or in
the shade. If sunburn is severe,
seek medical advice.
2
1
3
 ■ Reddened skin
 ■ Pain in the area of the burn
Later there may be:
 ■ Blistering of the affected skin
 ■ To move the casualty out of the sun
as soon as possible
 ■ To relieve discomfort and pain
 ■ If there is extensive blistering,
or other skin damage, seek
medical advice.
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
SEE ALSO Dehydration opposite | Heat exhaustion p.184 | Heatstroke p.185 | Minor burns and scalds p.176
SUNBURN
WHAT TO DO
CAUTION
184
EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD
HEAT EXHAUSTION
This disorder is caused by loss of salt and water from
the body through excessive sweating. It usually develops
gradually and often affects people who are not acclimatized to
hot, humid conditions. People who are unwell, especially those
with illnesses that cause vomiting and diarrhea, are more
susceptible than others to developing heat exhaustion.
A dangerous and common cause of heat exhaustion occurs
when the body produces more heat than it can cope with. Some
nonprescription drugs, such as ecstasy, can affect the body’s
temperature regulation system. This, combined with the
exertion of dancing in a warm environment, can result in a
person becoming overheated and dehydrated. These effects
can lead to heatstroke and even death.
As the condition develops, there
may be:
 ■ Headache, dizziness, and confusion
 ■ Loss of appetite and nausea
 ■ Sweating, with pale, clammy skin
 ■ Cramps in the arms, legs,
or abdomen
 ■ Rapid, weakening pulse
and breathing
 ■ To cool the casualty down
 ■ To replace lost body fluids and salts
 ■ To obtain medical help if necessary
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
SEE ALSO Dehydration p.182 | Heatstroke opposite | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty to a cool, shady place. Get
him to lie down and raise and support his legs
to improve blood flow to his brain.
If the casualty’s vital signs worsen, call 911 for
emergency help. Monitor and record vital
signs—level of response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—while you are waiting for help to arrive.
Give him plenty of water to drink. Oral
rehydration salts or isotonic drinks will help
with salt replacement.
Monitor and record vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53).
Even if the casualty recovers quickly, advise him to
seek medical help.
4
1 2
3
185
HEAT EXHAUSTION | HEATSTROKE
HEATSTROKE
SEE ALSO Drug poisoning p.201 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
WHAT TO DO
Quickly move the casualty to a cool place. Remove as much of his
outer clothing as possible. Call 911 for emergency help.
Monitor and record vital signs—level of
response, breathing, pulse, and temperature
(pp.52–53)—while waiting for help. If the casualty’s
temperature rises again, repeat the cooling process.
While waiting for emergency help, assist the casualty to sit
down, supported with cushions. The best way to cool the casualty
is to spray him with water and then fan him, repeatedly. A cold, wet
sheet may also work, and ice packs in the armpits and groin may
be affective.
Once the casualty’s temperature appears
to have returned to normal, replace the wet
sheet with a dry one.
4
2
1
3
A medical emergency, this condition is caused by a failure of
the “thermostat” in the brain to regulate body temperature. The
body becomes dangerously overheated, usually due to a high
fever or prolonged exposure to heat. Heatstroke can also result
from the use of drugs such as ecstasy. In some cases, heatstroke
follows heat exhaustion when sweating ceases and the body
cannot be cooled by the evaporation of sweat.
Heatstroke can develop with little warning, resulting in
unconsciousness within minutes of the casualty feeling unwell. There may be:
 ■ Headache, dizziness, and discomfort
 ■ Restlessness and confusion
 ■ Hot, flushed, and dry skin
 ■ Rapid deterioration in the level
of response
 ■ Full, bounding pulse
 ■ Body temperature above
104°F (40°C)
 ■ To lower the casualty’s body
temperature as quickly as possible
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness, and is not
breathing (or is just gasping),
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
186
EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD
HYPOTHERMIA
This condition develops when the body temperature falls below
95°F (35°C). The effects vary depending on the speed of onset
and the level to which the body temperature falls. The blood
supply to the superficial blood vessels in the skin, for example,
shuts down to maintain the function of the vital organs such as
the heart and brain. Moderate hypothermia can usually be
reversed. Severe hypothermia—when the core body temperature
falls below 86°F (30°C)—is often, although not always, fatal.
No matter how low the body temperature becomes, persist with
life-saving procedures until emergency help arrives because in
cases of hypothermia, survival may be possible even after
prolonged periods of resuscitation.
WHAT CAUSES HYPOTHERMIA
Hypothermia can be caused by prolonged exposure to cold.
Moving air has a much greater cooling effect than still air,
so a high “wind-chill factor” in cold weather can substantially
increase the risk of a person developing hypothermia. Immersion
in cold water can cause death from hypothermia. When
surrounded by cold water, the body can cool up to 30 times
faster than in dry air, and body temperature falls rapidly.
Hypothermia may also develop indoors in poorly heated
houses. Elderly people, infants, homeless people, and those who
are thin and frail are particularly vulnerable. Lack of activity,
chronic illness and fatigue all increase the risk; alcohol and
drugs can exacerbate the condition.
SEE ALSO Drowning p.100 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87 | Water incidents p.36
As hypothermia develops,
there may be:
 ■ Shivering, and cold, pale, dry skin
 ■ Apathy, disorientation,
or irrational behavior
 ■ Lethargy or impaired consciousness
 ■ Slow and shallow breathing
 ■ Slow and weakening pulse. In
extreme cases, the heart may stop
 ■ To prevent the casualty from losing
more body heat
 ■ To rewarm the casualty quickly
 ■ To obtain emergency help
if necessary
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not give the casualty alcohol
because it dilates superficial
blood vessels and allows
heat to escape, making
hypothermia worse.
 ■ Do not place any direct heat
sources, such as hot-water
bottles or fires, next to the
casualty because these may
cause burns.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing, begin CPR
with chest compressions
(pp.54–87). Persist with CPR
until emergency help arrives to
assess the casualty’s condition.
 ■ It is important that you stay
warm yourself.
CAUTION
187
HYPOTHERMIA
TREATMENT WHEN OUTDOORS
Take the casualty to a sheltered place
as quickly as possible. Shield the casualty from
the wind.
Call 911 or send for emergency help. Ideally,
two people should go for help and stay
together if you are in a remote area. It
is important that you do not leave the casualty
by himself; someone must remain with him
at all times.
To help rewarm a casualty who is conscious,
give him warm drinks and high-energy foods
such as chocolate, if available.
Monitor and record the casualty’s vital
signs—level of response, breathing, pulse, and
temperature (pp.52–53)—while waiting for help
to arrive.
Remove and replace any wet clothing
if possible; do not give him your clothes. Make
sure his head is covered.
Protect the casualty from the ground.
Lay him on a thick layer of dry insulating
material, such as pine branches. Put him in a dry
sleeping bag and/or cover him with blankets or
newspapers. Wrap him in a plastic or foil survival
bag, if available. You can shelter and warm him with
your body.
2
4
5
6
3
1
»
188
EFFECTS OF HEAT AND COLD
HYPOTHERMIA
TREATMENT WHEN INDOORS
The casualty must be rewarmed quickly. Cover
him with layers of blankets and warm the room
to about 77°F (25°C).
Monitor and record the casualty’s vital
signs—level of response, breathing, pulse, and
temperature (pp.52–53)—as he is rewarmed.
Give the casualty a warm drink such as soup
and/or high-energy foods such as chocolate to
help rewarm him.
Seek medical advice. Be aware that in the
elderly, hypothermia may also be disguising
the symptoms of a stroke (pp.212–13), a heart
attack (p.211), an underactive thyroid gland
(hypothyroidism), or a severe infection.
4
1 2
A baby’s mechanisms for regulating
body temperature are underdeveloped,
so she may develop hypothermia in a
cold room. The baby’s skin may look
healthy but feel cold, and she may be
limp and unusually quiet, and refuse to
feed. Rewarm a cold baby by wrapping
her in blankets and warming the room.
You should always seek medical advice
if you suspect a baby has hypothermia.
«
3
SPECIAL CASE HYPOTHERMIA IN INFANTS
189
HYPOTHERMIA | FROSTBITE
FROSTBITE
SEE ALSO Hypothermia pp.186–88
WHAT TO DO
Advise the casualty to put his hands, if affected, in his armpits.
Move the casualty into warmth before you thaw the affected
part further.
Raise the affected limb to
reduce swelling. An adult
may take the recommended
dose of acetaminophen, or her
own pain medicine, and a child,
the recommended dose of
acetaminophen syrup (not
aspirin). Take or send the
casualty to the hospital.
Once inside, gently remove
gloves, rings, and any other
constrictions, such as boots.
Warm the affected part with
your hands, in your lap, or
continue to warm them in the
casualty’s armpits. Avoid rubbing
the affected area because
this can damage skin and
other tissues.
Place the affected parts in
tepid water, or lower than
104°F (40°C). Dry gently and
apply a light dressing of dry
gauze bandage.
4
2
1
3
With this condition, the tissues of the extremities—usually the
fingers and toes—freeze due to low temperatures. In severe
cases, this freezing can lead to permanent loss of sensation and,
eventually, tissue death and gangrene as the blood vessels and
soft tissues become permanently damaged.
Frostbite usually occurs in freezing or cold and windy
conditions. People who cannot move around to increase their
circulation are particularly susceptible.
In many cases, frostbite is accompanied by hypothermia
(pp.186–87), and this should be treated accordingly.
There may be:
 ■ At first, “pins-and-needles”
 ■ Paleness (pallor) followed
by numbness
 ■ Hardening and stiffening
of the skin
 ■ A color change of the skin
of the affected area: first white,
then mottled and blue. On
recovery, the skin may be red, hot,
painful, and blistered. Where
gangrene occurs, the tissue may
become black due to loss
of blood supply.
 ■ To warm the affected area slowly
to prevent further tissue damage
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
 ■ Do not put the affected part
near direct heat.
 ■ Do not attempt to thaw the
affected part until there is
no danger of it refreezing.
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
Objects that find their way into the
body, either through a wound in the
skin or via an orifice, are known as “foreign
bodies.” These range from grit in the eye to
small objects that young children may push
into their noses and ears. These can be
distressing but do not usually cause serious
problems for the casualty.
Poisoning may result from exposure to
or ingestion of toxic substances, chemicals,
and contaminated food. The effects of
poisons vary but medical advice will be
needed in most cases.
Insect stings and marine stings can often
be treated with first aid. However, multiple
stings can produce a reaction that requires
urgent medical help. Animal and human
bites always require medical attention due
to the risk of infection.
 ■ To ensure the safety of yourself and
the casualty
 ■ To assess the casualty’s condition quickly
and calmly
 ■ To assess the potential danger of a
foreign object
 ■ To identify the poisonous substance
 ■ To comfort and reassure the casualty
 ■ To look for and treat any injuries associated
with the condition
 ■ To obtain medical help if necessary. Call 911 for
emergency help if you suspect a serious illness
or injury, or anaphylaxis
 ■ To be aware of your own needs
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
9
FOREIGN OBJECTS,
POISONING, BITES & STINGS
192
FOREIGN OBJECTS, POISONING, BITES, AND STINGS
THE SENSORY ORGANS
The body is covered and protected by the skin.
This is one of the body’s largest organs and is
made up of two layers: the outer layer, called
the epidermis, and an inner layer, the dermis.
The skin forms a barrier against harmful
substances and germs. It is also an important
sense organ, containing nerves that ensure
that the body is sensitive to heat, cold, pain,
and touch.
These complex organs enable us to see the
world around us. Each eye consists of a colored
part (iris) with a small opening (pupil) that
allows light to enter the eye. The size of the
pupil changes according to the amount of light
that is entering the eye.
Light is focused by the transparent lens onto
a “screen” (retina) at the back of the eye. Special
cells in the retina convert this information into
electrical impulses that then travel, via the optic
nerve that leads from the eye, to the part of the
brain where the impulses are analyzed.
Each eye is protected by a bony socket in the
skull (p.133). The eyelids and delicate membranes
called conjunctiva protect the front of the eyes.
Tears form a protective film across the front
of the conjunctiva, lubricating the surface and
flushing away dust and dirt.
Structure of the eye
The eyes are fluid-filled, spherical structures about
1 in (2.5 cm) in diameter. They have focusing parts
(cornea and lens), and light- and color-sensitive cells
in the retina.
Structure of the skin
The skin consists of the thin epidermis and the
thicker dermis, which sit on a layer of fatty tissue
(subcutaneous fat). Blood vessels, nerves, muscles,
sebaceous (oil) glands, sweat glands, and hair roots
(follicles) lie in the dermis.
THE SKIN
THE EYES
Hair
Nerve
Epidermis
Dermis
Fatty tissue
Blood vessel
Muscle
Lens focuses light
onto retina
Cornea directs
light entering
eye onto lens
Sclera maintains
eyeball’s shape
Iris adjusts
size of pupil
Blood
vessel
Pupil allows
light to enter
eyeball
Conjunctiva
protects eye
surface
Muscle
Retina
Optic
nerve
193
THE SENSORY ORGANS
These cavities form the entrances to the
digestive and respiratory tracts respectively.
The nasal cavities connect with the throat.
They are lined with blood vessels and
membranes that secrete mucus to trap debris
as it enters the nose. Food enters the digestive
tract via the mouth, which leads into the
esophagus. The epiglottis, a flap at the back
of the throat, prevents food from entering
the windpipe (trachea).
Structure of the mouth and nose
The nostrils lead into the two nasal cavities,
which are lined with mucous membranes and blood
vessels. The nasal cavities connect directly with the
top of the throat, which is at the back of the mouth.
Structure of the ear
The ear is divided into three main parts:
the outer, middle, and inner ear. The
eardrum separates the outer and middle
ear. The inner ear contains the organs of
hearing and balance.
In addition to being the organs of hearing,
the ears play an important role in balance.
The visible part of each ear, the auricle, funnels
sounds into the ear canal to vibrate the
eardrum. Fine hairs in the ear canal filter
out dust, and glands secrete ear wax to trap
any other small particles. The vibrations of
the eardrum pass across the middle ear to
the hearing apparatus (cochlea) in the
inner ear. This structure converts the
vibrations into nerve impulses and transmits
them to the brain via the auditory nerve. The
vestibular apparatus within the inner ear is
involved in balance.
THE EARS
THE MOUTH AND NOSE
Vestibular apparatus
regulates balance Auricular
cartilage
Ear
canal
Eardrum vibrates in
response to sound
Eustachian tube connects
middle ear with back of
nose and throat
Cochlea contains
receptor for hearing
Outer ear Inner ear
Auditory nerve transmits
sound impulses to brain
Middle ear
Pinna
(ear flap)
Nasal cavity is lined
with blood vessels and
mucous membranes
Salivary gland
Tongue
Throat
Epiglottis
Larynx
Esophagus
Trachea
Scalp muscle
194
FOREIGN OBJECTS, POISONING, BITES, AND STINGS
SPLINTER
 ■ To remove the splinter
 ■ To minimize the risk of infection
 ■ Ask the casualty about tetanus
immunization. Seek medical
advice if he is not sure whether
he is up to date on his tetanus
immunization.
Small splinters of wood, metal, or glass may enter the skin.
They carry a risk of infection because they are rarely clean. Often
a splinter can be successfully withdrawn from the skin using
tweezers. However, if the splinter is deeply embedded, lies over
a joint, or is difficult to remove, you should leave it in place and
advise the casualty to seek medical help.
If a splinter is embedded or
difficult to dislodge, do not probe
the area with a sharp object,
such as a needle, or you may
introduce infection. Pad around
the splinter until you can
bandage over it without pressing
on it, and seek medical help.
SPECIAL CASE EMBEDDED
SPLINTER
WHAT TO DO
Gently clean the area around the splinter with soap and
warm water.
Draw the splinter out in
a straight line at the same
angle that it went into the skin;
make sure it does not break.
Hold the tweezers close to
the end for a better grip.
Grasp the splinter with tweezers
as close to the skin as possible.
Carefully squeeze the
wound to encourage a little
bleeding. This will help flush out
any remaining dirt.
Wash again with soap and
water. Clean and dry the
wound and cover with a dressing.
2 3
1
4
5
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
SEE ALSO Foreign object in a cut p.121 | Infected wound p.120
EMBEDDED FISHHOOK | SWALLOWED FOREIGN OBJECT
195
EMBEDDED FISHHOOK
SWALLOWED FOREIGN OBJECT
 ■ To obtain medical help
 ■ To minimize the risk of infection
 ■ If help is delayed, to remove the
fishhook without causing the
casualty any further injury and pain
 ■ To obtain medical advice as
soon as possible
 ■ Do not try to pull out a fishhook
unless you can cut off the barb.
If you cannot, seek medical help.
 ■ Seek medical advice if he is not
sure if he is up to date on his
tetanus immunization.
A fishhook that is embedded in the skin is difficult to remove
because of the barb at the end of the hook. If possible, you
should ensure that the hook is removed by a healthcare
professional. Only attempt to remove a hook yourself if medical
help is not readily available. Embedded fishhooks carry a risk of
infection, including tetanus.
Children may put small items in their mouths when playing. An
adult may swallow a bone by mistake or ingest unlikely objects
on purpose. Most objects will pass through the digestive system,
but some can cause a blockage or perforation.
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO
Support the injured area.
If possible, cut off the
fishing line as close to the
hook as possible.
Reassure the casualty and
find out what he swallowed.
If medical help is
unavailable, you can try to
remove the hook if you can see
the barb. Cut off the barb with
wirecutters, then carefully
withdraw the hook back through
the skin by its eye.
Seek medical advice.
If medical help is readily
available, build up pads of
gauze around the hook until you
can bandage over the top
without pushing it in farther.
Bandage over the padding and
the hook and arrange to take or
send the casualty to the hospital.
Clean and dry the wound
and cover with a dressing.
3
2
2
1
1
4
 ■ Do not let the casualty make
himself vomit because the object
could damage the esophagus.
YOUR AIMS
YOUR AIM
CAUTION
CAUTION
196
FOREIGN OBJECTS, POISONING, BITES, AND STINGS
FOREIGN OBJECT IN THE EYE
There may be:
 ■ Blurred vision
 ■ Pain or discomfort
 ■ Redness and watering of the eye
 ■ Eyelids held tight in spasm
 ■ To prevent injury to the eye
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIM
 ■ Do not touch anything that is
sticking to, or embedded in, the
eyeball. Cover the eye (p.123)
and arrange to take or send the
casualty to the hospital.
Foreign objects such as grit, a loose eyelash, or a contact lens
that are floating on the surface of the eye can be easily rinsed
out. However, you must not attempt to remove anything that
sticks to the eye or penetrates the eyeball because this may
damage the eye. Instead, make sure that the casualty receives
urgent medical attention.
WHAT TO DO
Stand beside, or just behind,
the casualty. Gently
separate her eyelids with your
thumbs or finger and thumb. Ask
her to look right, left, up, and
down. Examine every part of her
eye as she does this.
If you can see a foreign
object on the white of the
eye, wash it out by pouring clean
water from a glass or pitcher, or by
using a sterile eyewash if you have
one. Put a towel around the
casualty’s shoulders. Hold her eye
open and pour the water from the
inner corner so that it drains onto
the towel.
If this is unsuccessful, try lifting the object off with a moist swab
or the damp corner of a clean handkerchief or tissue. If you still
cannot remove the object, seek medical help.
Advise the casualty not to rub her eye. Ask her to sit down
facing a light.
3
4
1
2
Ask the casualty to grasp the
lashes on her upper eyelid and
pull the upper lid over the lower
lid; the lower lashes may brush
the particle clear. If this is
unsuccessful, ask her to try
blinking underwater because this
may also make the object float
off. Do not attempt to do this if
the object is large or abrasive.
SEE ALSO Eye wound p.123
CAUTION
SPECIAL CASE IF OBJECT
IS UNDER UPPER EYELID
197
FOREIGN OBJECT IN THE EYE | FOREIGN OBJECT IN THE EAR | FOREIGN OBJECT IN THE NOSE
FOREIGN OBJECT IN THE EAR
FOREIGN OBJECT IN THE NOSE
There may be:
 ■ Difficult or noisy breathing through
the nose
 ■ Swelling of the nose
 ■ Smelly or blood-stained discharge,
indicating that an object may have
been lodged for some time
 ■ To arrange transportation
to the hospital
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIM
 ■ Do not attempt to remove any
object that is lodged in the ear.
You may cause serious injury
and push the foreign object
in farther.
 ■ Do not attempt to remove the
foreign object, even if you can
see it.
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO
Arrange to take or send the
casualty to the hospital. Do
not try to remove a lodged
foreign object yourself.
Try to keep the casualty
quiet and calm. Tell him to
breathe through his mouth at a
normal rate. Advise him not to
poke inside his nose to try to
remove the object himself.
Reassure the casualty
during the journey or until
medical help arrives.
Arrange to take or send the
casualty to the hospital, so
that it can be safely removed
by medical staff.
2
2
1
1
If a foreign object becomes lodged in the ear, it may cause
temporary loss of hearing by blocking the ear canal. In some
cases, a foreign object may damage the eardrum. Young children
frequently push objects into their ears. The tips of cotton swabs
are often left in the ear. Insects can fly or crawl into the ear and
may cause distress.
Young children may push small objects up their noses. Objects
can block the nose and cause infection. If the object is sharp it
can damage the tissues, and “button” batteries can cause burns
and bleeding. Do not try to remove a foreign object; you may
cause injury or push it farther into the airway.
 ■ To prevent injury to the ear
 ■ To remove a trapped insect
 ■ To arrange transportation to the
hospital if a foreign object is lodged
in the ear
YOUR AIMS
Reassure the casualty and ask
him to sit down. Support his
head, with the affected ear
uppermost. Gently flood the ear
with tepid water; the insect
should float out. If this flooding
does not remove the insect, seek
medical help.
SPECIAL CASE INSECT INSIDE THE EAR
CAUTION
CAUTION
198
FOREIGN OBJECTS, POISONING, BITES, AND STINGS
HOW POISONS AFFECT THE BODY
A poison (toxin) is a substance that, if taken
into or absorbed into the body in sufficient
quantity, can cause either temporary or
permanent damage.
Poisons can be swallowed, absorbed
through the skin, inhaled, splashed into
the eyes, or injected. Once in the body,
they may enter the bloodstream and
be carried swiftly to all organs and tissues.
Signs and symptoms of poisoning vary with
the poison. They may develop quickly or over
a number of days. Vomiting is common,
especially when the poison has been
ingested. Inhaled poisons often
cause breathing difficulties.
Effects of poisons on the body
Poisons can enter the body through
the skin, digestive system, lungs, or
bloodstream. Once there, they can be
carried to all parts of the body and
cause multiple side effects.
Poisons reaching the brain may cause
confusion, delirium, seizures, and
unconsciousness
Swallowed corrosive chemicals can burn
the mouth, lips, and food
passage (esophagus)
Some poisons disturb the
action of the heart
by interrupting its normal
electrical activity
Poisons reaching the
kidneys (situated toward
the back of the body behind
the large intestine) from
the bloodstream can
cause serious damage
to these organs
Injected poisons and
drugs rapidly enter
the bloodstream;
some prevent blood
cells from carrying oxygen
to body tissues
Corrosive chemicals can
burn the skin. Pesticides
and plant toxins may be
absorbed through the
skin, causing local or
general reactions
Poisons in the digestive
system can cause
vomiting, abdominal
pain, and diarrhea
Poisons can seriously
damage the liver
Poisonous gases, solvents,
vapors, or fumes can be
inhaled and affect the airways
and lungs, causing severe
breathing problems
199
HOW POISONS AFFECT THE BODY | TYPES OF POISONS
TYPES OF POISONS
Some poisons are man-made—for example,
chemicals and drugs—and these are found in
the home as well as in industry. Almost every
household contains substances that are
potentially poisonous, such as bleach and paint
stripper, as well as prescribed or over-thecounter medicines, which may be dangerous if
taken in excessive amounts.
Other poisons occur in nature: for example,
plants produce poisons that may irritate the
skin or cause more serious symptoms if
ingested, and various insects and creatures
produce venom in their bites and stings.
Contamination of food by bacteria may result
in food poisoning—one of the most common
forms of poisoning.
■ Monitor casualty
■ Call emergency help
■ Start CPR if
 necessary (pp.54–87)
■ Use a face mask to protect
 yourself if you need to give
 rescue breaths
■ Remove contaminated
 clothing
■ Wash with cold water for
 20 minutes
■ Seek medical help
■ Start CPR if
necessary (pp.54–87)
■ Help casualty into fresh air
■ Call emergency help
■ Start CPR if
 necessary (pp.54–87)
■ Irrigate the eye for ten
 minutes (p.180)
■ Call emergency help
■ Start CPR if
 necessary (pp.54–87)
For sting/venom:
■ Remove sting, if possible
■ Call emergency help
■ Start CPR if
 necessary (pp.54–87)
For injected drugs:
■ Call emergency help
■ Start CPR if
necessary (pp.54–87)
■ Nausea and vomiting
■ Abdominal pain
■ Seizures
■ Irregular, or fast or slow,
 heartbeat
■ Impaired consciousness
■ Pain
■ Swelling
■ Rash
■ Redness
■ Itching
■ Difficulty breathing
■ Hypoxia
■ Gray-blue skin (cyanosis)
■ Cherry red lips
■ Pain and watering of
 the eye
■ Blurred vision
■ Pain, redness, and
 swelling at injection site
■ Blurred vision
■ Nausea and vomiting
■ Difficulty breathing
■ Seizures
■ Impaired consciousness
■ Anaphylactic shock
■ Drugs and alcohol
■ Cleaning products
■ Home improvement
 and gardening products
■ Plant poisons
■ Bacterial food poisons
■ Viral food poisons
■ Cleaning products
■ Home improvement
 and gardening products
■ Industrial poisons
■ Plant poisons
■ Fumes of cleaning and
 construction products
■ Industrial poisons
■ Fumes from fires
■ Cleaning products
■ Home improvement
 and gardening products
■ Industrial poisons
■ Plant poisons
■ Venom from stings
 and bites
■ Drugs
Swallowed
(ingested)
Absorbed
through
the skin
Inhaled
Splashed in
the eye
Injected
through
the skin
ROUTE OF ENTRY
INTO THE BODY
POISON POSSIBLE EFFECTS ACTION
RECOGNIZING AND TREATING THE EFFECTS OF POISONING
200
FOREIGN OBJECTS, POISONING, BITES, AND STINGS
SWALLOWED POISONS
SEE ALSO Alcohol poisoning p.202 | Chemical burn p.179 | Drug poisoning opposite | Inhalation of fumes pp.98–99
| The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
Chemicals that are swallowed may harm the digestive tract, or
cause more widespread damage if they enter the bloodstream and
are transported to other parts of the body. Hazardous chemicals
include household substances such as bleach and paint stripper,
which are poisonous or corrosive if swallowed. Drugs, both
prescribed or those bought over the counter, can also be harmful
if an overdose is taken. Some plants and their berries can also
be poisonous.
 ■ To maintain an open airway,
breathing, and circulation
 ■ To remove any
contaminated clothing
 ■ To identify the poison
 ■ To arrange urgent removal to
the hospital
 ■ History of ingestion/exposure
Depending on what has been
swallowed, there may be:
 ■ Vomiting, sometimes bloodstained,
later diarrhea
 ■ Cramping abdominal pains
 ■ Pain or a burning sensation
 ■ Empty containers in the vicinity
 ■ Impaired consciousness
 ■ Seizures
YOUR AIMS
RECOGNITION
 ■ Never attempt to
induce vomiting.
 ■ If a casualty is contaminated
with chemicals, wear protective
gloves, and goggles or a mask.
 ■ If the casualty is unconscious
and is not breathing (or just
gasping), begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
 ■ If there are any chemicals on the
casualty’s mouth, use a face
shield or pocket mask (adult
p.69, child p.79) rescue breaths.
WHAT TO DO
If the casualty is conscious, ask her what she has swallowed, and
if possible how much and when. Look for clues—for example,
poisonous plants, berries or empty containers. Try to reassure her.
Call Poison Control Center (800-222-1222). If the casualty is
unconscious, call 911 for emergency help. Give the dispatcher
as much information as possible about the poison. This information
will help the medical team treat the casualty.
Monitor and record the casualty’s vital signs (pp.52–53) while
waiting for help to arrive. Keep samples of any vomited material.
Give these samples, containers, and any others clues to the
emergency services.
1
2
3
If the casualty’s lips are burned by
corrosive substances, give him
frequent sips of cold milk or water
while waiting for help to arrive.
CAUTION
SPECIAL CASE IF LIPS ARE BURNED
201
SWALLOWED POISONS | DRUG POISONING
DRUG POISONING
SEE ALSO The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
Poisoning can result from an overdose of prescribed drugs, or
drugs that are bought over the counter. It can also be caused by
drug abuse or drug interaction. The effects vary depending on
the type of drug and how it is taken (below). When you call the
emergency services, give as much information as possible.
While waiting for help to arrive, look for containers that might
help you identify the drug.
 ■ To maintain breathing
and circulation
 ■ To arrange removal to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not induce vomiting.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing (or is just gasping),
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
WHAT TO DO
If the casualty
is conscious,
help him into a
comfortable
position and ask him
what he has taken.
Reassure him while
you talk to him.
Call 911 for
emergency
help. Tell the
dispatcher you
suspect drug
poisoning. Monitor
and record vital
signs—level of
response, breathing
and pulse (pp.52–
53)—while waiting.
Keep samples
of any vomited
material. Look for
evidence that might
help identify the
drug, such as empty
containers. Give
these samples
and containers to
the ambulance
personnel.
1 2 3
■ Lethargy and sleepiness, leading to unconsciousness
■ Shallow breathing ■ Weak, irregular or abnormally
slow or fast pulse
■ Excitable, hyperactive behavior, agitation
■ Sweating ■ Tremor of the hands
■ Hallucinations, in which the casualty may claim to
“hear voices” or “see things” ■ Dilated pupils
■ Small pupils ■ Sluggishness and confusion,
possibly leading to unconsciousness ■ Slow,
shallow breathing, which may stop altogether
■ Needle marks, which may be infected
■ Nausea and vomiting ■ Headaches ■ Hallucinations
■ Possibly, unconsciousness ■ Rarely, cardiac arrest
■ Drowsiness ■ Shallow breathing ■ Hallucinations
■ Upper abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting
■ Ringing in the ears ■ “Sighing” when breathing
■ Confusion and delirium ■ Dizziness
■ Barbiturates and
benzodiazepines (swallowed)
■ Amphetamines (including
ecstasy) and LSD (swallowed)
■ Cocaine (inhaled or injected)
■ Morphine, heroin (commonly
 injected)
■ Glue, lighter fuel (inhaled)
■ Ketamine
■ Acetaminophen (swallowed)
Pain relievers ■ Aspirin (swallowed)
Nervous system
depressants and
tranquilizers
Stimulants and
hallucinogens
Narcotics
Solvents
Anesthetic
CATEGORY DRUG EFFECTS OF POISONING
■ Little effect at first, but abdominal pain, nausea, and
vomiting may develop ■ Irreversible liver damage may
occur within three days (alcohol and malnourishment
increase the risk)
RECOGNIZING THE EFFECTS OF DRUG POISONING
CAUTION
202
FOREIGN OBJECTS, POISONING, BITES, AND STINGS
ALCOHOL POISONING
Alcohol is a drug that depresses the activity of the central
nervous system—in particular, the brain (pp.142–43). Prolonged
or excessive intake of alcohol can severely impair all physical
and mental functions, and the person may sink into
deep unconsciousness.
There are other risks to a casualty from alcohol poisoning. For
example: an unconscious casualty may inhale and choke on
vomit; alcohol widens (dilates) the blood vessels so the body
loses heat, and hypothermia may develop.
A casualty who smells of alcohol may be misdiagnosed and
not receive appropriate treatment for an underlying cause of
unconsciousness, such as a head injury, stroke, heart attack,
or hypoglycemia.
WHAT TO DO
Cover the casualty with a coat or blanket to protect him from
the cold.
Assess the casualty for any injuries, especially head injuries, or
other medical conditions.
Monitor and record vital signs—level of response, pulse, and
breathing (pp.52–53)—until the casualty recovers or is placed in
the care of a responsible person. If you are in any doubt about the
casualty’s condition, call 911 for emergency help.
2
1
3
 ■ To maintain an open airway
 ■ To assess for other conditions
 ■ To seek medical help if necessary
There may be:
 ■ A strong smell of alcohol
 ■ Empty bottles or cans
 ■ Impaired consciousness:
the casualty may respond
if roused, but will quickly relapse
 ■ Flushed and moist face
 ■ Deep, noisy breathing
 ■ Full, bounding pulse
 ■ Unconsciousness
In the later stages of
unconsciousness:
 ■ Shallow breathing
 ■ Weak, rapid pulse
 ■ Dilated pupils that react poorly
to light
YOUR AIMS
RECOGNITION
 ■ Do not induce vomiting.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness, open the
airway. If breathing stops,
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
SEE ALSO Head injury pp.144–45 | Heart attack p.211 | Stroke pp.212–13 | Hypoglycemia p.215
| Hypothermia p.186–88 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
CAUTION
203
ALCOHOL POISONING | ANIMAL AND HUMAN BITES
ANIMAL AND HUMAN BITES
WHAT TO DO
Wash the bite wound thoroughly with soap and warm water in
order to minimize the risk of infection.
Raise and support the wound and pat dry with clean gauze swabs.
Then cover with a sterile wound dressing.
Arrange to take or send the casualty to the hospital if the bite
breaks the skin; many will require antibiotics.
2
1
3
Bites from sharp, pointed teeth cause deep puncture wounds
that can damage tissues and introduce germs. Bites also crush
the tissue. Any bite that breaks the skin needs prompt first aid
because there is a high risk of infection.
A serious risk is rabies, a potentially fatal viral infection
of the nervous system. The virus is carried in the saliva of
infected animals. If bitten in an area where there is a risk of
rabies, seek medical advice because the casualty must be given
antirabies injections. Try to identify the animal but do not
attempt to approach or trap it. Tetanus is also a potential risk
following any animal bite.
Human bites carry only a small risk of transmitting the hepatis
or HIV/AIDS viruses. However, medical advice should be sought
right away.
YOUR AIMS
 ■ If you suspect rabies, arrange to
take or send the casualty to the
hospital immediately.
 ■ Ask the casualty about tetanus
immunization. Seek medical
advice if he is unsure if he is upto-date with his immunizations.
If the wound is deep, control
bleeding by applying direct
pressure over a sterile pad and
raise the injured part. Cover
the wound and pad with a
sterile dressing or large, clean
nonfluffy pad and bandage
firmly in place. Treat the
casualty for shock and call 911
for emergency help.
SEE ALSO Cuts and scrapes p.119 | Infected wound p.120 | Severe external bleeding pp.114–15 | Shock pp.112–13
 ■ To control bleeding
 ■ To minimize the risk of infection
 ■ To obtain medical help if necessary
SPECIAL CASE
 FOR A DEEP WOUND
CAUTION
204
FOREIGN OBJECTS, POISONING, BITES, AND STINGS
INSECT STING
SEE ALSO Allergy p.222 | Anaphylactic shock p.223 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
Usually, a sting from a bee, wasp, or hornet is painful rather
than dangerous. An initial sharp pain is followed by mild swelling,
redness, and soreness.
However, multiple insect stings can produce a serious
reaction. A sting in the mouth or throat is potentially dangerous
because swelling can obstruct the airway. With any bite or sting,
it is important to watch for signs of an allergic reaction, which
can lead to anaphylactic shock (p.223).
 ■ Pain at the site of the sting
 ■ Redness and swelling around the site
of the sting
 ■ To relieve swelling and pain
 ■ To arrange removal to the hospital
if necessary
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Call 911 for emergency help if
the casualty shows signs of
anaphylactic shock (p.223), such
as breathing difficulties and/or
swelling of the face and neck.
Monitor and record vital signs—
level of response, breathing, and
pulse (pp.52–53)—while waiting
for help to arrive.
WHAT TO DO
Reassure the casualty. If
the sting is visible, brush
or scrape it off sideways with
the edge of a credit card or your
fingernail. Do not use tweezers
because you could squeeze the
stinger and inject more poison
into the casualty.
Raise the affected part if
possible, and apply a cold
compress such as an ice pack
(p.241) to minimize swelling.
Advise the casualty to keep the
compress in place for at least
ten minutes. Tell her to seek
medical advice if the pain and
swelling persist.
Monitor vital signs—level
of response, breathing, and
pulse (pp.52–53). Watch for signs
of an allergic reaction, such
as wheezing and/or reddened,
swollen, itchy skin.
2
3
1
If a casualty has been stung in
the mouth, there is a risk that
swelling of tissues in the mouth
and/or throat may occur, causing
the airway to become blocked.
To help prevent this, give the
casualty an ice cube to suck or a
glass of cold water to sip. Call 911
for emergency help if swelling
starts to develop.
SPECIAL CASE
 STINGS IN THE MOUTH
AND THROAT
CAUTION
205
INSECT STING | TICK BITE | OTHER BITES AND STINGS
TICK BITE
OTHER BITES AND STINGS
Scorpion stings as well as bites from some spiders and
mosquitoes can cause serious illness, and may be fatal.
Bites or stings in the mouth or throat are potentially
dangerous because swelling can obstruct the airway. Be alert
to an allergic reaction, which may lead the casualty to suffer
anaphylactic shock (p.223).
Ticks are tiny, spiderlike creatures found in grass or woodlands.
They attach themselves to passing animals (including humans)
and bite into the skin to suck blood. When sucking blood, a tick
swells to about the size of a pea, and it can then be seen easily.
Ticks can carry disease and cause infection, so they should be
removed as soon as possible.
Depends on the species, but
generally:
 ■ Pain, redness, and swelling at site
of sting
 ■ Nausea and vomiting
 ■ Headache
 ■ To relieve pain and swelling
 ■ To arrange removal to the hospital
if necessary
 ■ To remove the tick
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
YOUR AIM
 ■ Call 911 for emergency help
if a scorpion or a black widow
spider has stung the casualty,
or if he is showing signs of
anaphylactic shock (p.223).
 ■ Do not try to remove the tick
with butter or petroleum jelly or
burn or freeze it, since it may
regurgitate infective fluids into
the casualty.
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO
Raise the affected part
if possible. Place a cold
compress such as an ice pack
(p.241) on the affected area for
at least ten minutes to minimize
the risk of swelling.
Reassure the casualty and
help him sit or lie down.
Using tweezers, grasp
the tick’s head as close
to the casualty’s skin as you can.
Gently pull the head upward using
steady, even pressure. Do not
jerk the tick, which may leave the
mouth parts embedded or cause
the tick to regurgitate infective
fluids into the skin.
Monitor vital signs—level
of response, breathing, and
pulse (pp.52–53). Watch for
signs of an allergic reaction,
such as wheezing and/or
reddened, swollen, itchy skin.
Save the tick for
identification; place
it in a sealed plastic bag.
The casualty should seek
medical advice; tell him
to take the tick because
it may be required
for analysis.
3
2
2
1
1
CAUTION
CAUTION
SEE ALSO Allergy p.222 | Anaphylactic shock p.223 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
206
FOREIGN OBJECTS, POISONING, BITES, AND STINGS
SNAKE BITE
SEE ALSO Anaphylactic shock p.223 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
While a snake bite is usually not serious, it is safer to
assume that a snake is venomous if a person has been bitten.
A venomous bite is often painless. Depending on the snake,
venom may cause local tissue destruction; it may block nerve
impulses, causing breathing and the heart to stop; or, cause
blood clotting (coagulation) and then internal bleeding.
There are four groups of venomous snakes in the US:
rattlesnakes, copperheads, water moccasins, and coral snakes.
Do not attempt to kill or capture the snake that bit the casualty.
But, if possible, make a note of the snake’s appearance to help
doctors identify the correct antivenom. Take precautions to
prevent other people from being bitten. The first aid principles
for treating any kind of snake bite are the same.
Help the casualty lie down, with head and shoulders raised.
Reassure the casualty and advise her not to move the bitten limb
to prevent venom from spreading. Call 911 for emergency help.
If you have been properly trained, consider wrapping a
pressure bandage around the entire length of the limb that was
bitten. The bandage should be comfortably snug but loose enough to
allow a finger to be slipped under it.
Whether or not it is wrapped, the bitten limb
should be immobilized with a splint to prevent
the casualty from bending it. Keep the limb below
the level of the heart.
Monitor and record vital signs (pp.52–53) while
waiting for emergency help. The casualty must
remain still, and should be taken to the hospital as
soon as possible.
1
2
3
4
 ■ To prevent venom from spreading
 ■ To arrange urgent removal to
the hospital
There may be:
 ■ A pair of puncture marks—the bite
may be painless
 ■ Severe pain, redness, and swelling at
the bite
 ■ Nausea and vomiting
 ■ Disturbed vision
 ■ Increased salivation and sweating
 ■ Labored breathing; it may
stop altogether
YOUR AIMS
RECOGNITION
 ■ Do not apply a tourniquet, slash
the wound with a knife, or try to
suck out the venom.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing normally,
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
WHAT TO DO
CAUTION
207
SNAKE BITE | STINGS FROM SEA CREATURES | MARINE PUNCTURE WOUND
STINGS FROM SEA CREATURES
MARINE PUNCTURE WOUND
SEE ALSO Allergy p.222 | Anaphylactic shock p.223
 ■ To relieve pain and discomfort
YOUR AIM
WHAT TO DO
Encourage the casualty to
sit or lie down. Wash the area
in copious quantities of vinegar
to remove the stinging cells
(nematocysts) or deactivate
the venom.
Monitor vital signs—level
of response, breathing, and
pulse (pp.52–53). Watch for signs
of an allergic reaction, such as
wheezing.
Help the casualty sit down.
Immerse the injured part in
water as hot as he can tolerate for
about 30 minutes.
Take or send the casualty to
the hospital so that the
spines can be safely removed.
To treat pain after venom has
been deactivated, immerse
the affected area in hot water.
1
2
2
1
3
Jellyfish, Portuguese man o' wars, sea anemones, and corals can
all cause stings. Their venom is contained in stinging cells that stick
to the casualty's skin. Most marine species found in temperate
regions are not dangerous. However, some tropical marine
creatures can cause severe poisoning. Death may result from
paralysis of the chest muscles or, rarely, anaphylactic shock (p.223).
Many marine creatures have spines that provide a mechanism
against attack from predators but that can also cause painful
wounds if stepped on. Sea urchins and weever fish have sharp
spines that can become embedded in the sole of the foot.
Wounds may become infected if the spines are not removed.
Hot water breaks down fish venom.
 ■ To relieve pain and discomfort
 ■ To seek medical help
if necessary
Depends on the species,
but generally:
 ■ Pain, redness, and swelling at site
of sting
 ■ Nausea and vomiting
 ■ Headache
YOUR AIMS
RECOGNITION
 ■ Do not bandage the wound.
 ■ Do not scald the casualty.
Pour copious amounts of
vinegar over the area of the
injury to incapacitate the
stinging cells. Help the
casualty sit down. Call 911 for
emergency help.
WHAT TO DO
SPECIAL CASE
 JELLYFISH STING
CAUTION
CAUTION
 ■ If the injury is extensive or there
is a severe reaction, call 911 for
emergency help. Monitor and
record vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—while waiting for
help to arrive.
Many everyday conditions, such as
fever and headache, need prompt
treatment and respond well to first aid.
However, a minor complaint can be
the start of serious illness, so you should
always be alert to this and seek medical
advice if you are in doubt about the
casualty’s condition.
Other conditions such as heart attack,
diabetes-related hypoglycemia (lower-thannormal blood sugar levels), severe allergic
reaction (anaphylaxis), and meningitis are
potentially life-threatening and require
urgent medical attention.
Childbirth is a natural process and often
takes many hours. So when a woman
goes into labor unexpectedly, while it is
important to call for emergency help, there
is usually plenty of time to seek help and
get her to the hospital. In the rare event of
a baby arriving quickly, do not try to deliver
the baby—the birth will happen naturally
without intervention.
Miscarriage, however, is a potentially
serious problem due to the risk of severe
bleeding. A woman who is miscarrying
needs urgent medical help.
 ■ To assess the casualty’s condition quietly
and calmly
 ■ To comfort and reassure the casualty
 ■ To call 911 for emergency help if you suspect
a serious illness
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
10
MEDICAL
CONDITIONS
210
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
 ■ Vicelike central chest pain, which
may spread to the jaw and down one
or both arms
 ■ Pain easing with rest
 ■ Shortness of breath
 ■ Fatigue, which is often sudden
and extreme
 ■ Feeling of anxiety
 ■ To ease strain on the heart by
ensuring that the casualty rests
 ■ To help the casualty with
any medication
 ■ To obtain medical help if necessary
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ If the casualty becomes
unconscious and is not
breathing normally, begin CPR
with chest compressions
(pp.54–87).
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty stop what he is doing and sit down. Make sure
that he is comfortable and reassure him; this should help the
pain to ease.
If the casualty has angina medication, such as tablets or a pumpaction or aerosol spray, let him administer it himself. If necessary,
help him take it.
If the pain is not relieved five minutes after taking the angina
medication, advise him to take a second dose.
Encourage the casualty to rest, and keep any bystanders away.
If the casualty is still in pain five minutes after the second dose,
or it returns, suspect a heart attack (opposite). Call 911 for
emergency help.
If the pain subsides after rest and/or medication, the casualty will
usually be able to resume what he was doing. If he is concerned,
tell him to seek medical advice.
2
1
3
4
5
6
The term angina means literally a constriction of the chest.
Angina occurs when coronary arteries that supply the heart
muscle with blood become narrowed and cannot carry sufficient
blood to meet increased demands during exertion or excitement.
An attack forces the casualty to rest; the pain should ease
soon afterward.
ANGINA
CAUTION
SEE ALSO Heart attack opposite
211
ANGINA | HEART ATTACK
HEART ATTACK
 ■ Persistent, vicelike central chest
pain, which may spread to the jaw
and down one or both arms. Unlike
angina (opposite), the pain does not
ease when the casualty rests.
 ■ Breathlessness
 ■ Discomfort occurring high in the
abdomen, which may feel similar
to severe indigestion
 ■ Collapse, often without any warning
 ■ Sudden faintness or dizziness
 ■ Casualty feels a sense of
impending doom
 ■ “Ashen” skin and blueness at the lips
 ■ A rapid, weak, or irregular pulse
 ■ Profuse sweating
 ■ Extreme gasping for air
(“air hunger”)
 ■ To ease the strain on the casualty’s
heart by ensuring that he rests
 ■ To call for urgent medical help
without delay
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
 ■ If the casualty becomes
unconscious and is not
breathing normally, begin CPR
with chest compressions
(pp.54–87).
 ■ Ask the casualty, if conscious,
about possible aspirin allergy.
A heart attack is most commonly caused by a sudden
obstruction of the blood supply to part of the heart muscle—
for example, because of a clot in a coronary artery (coronary
thrombosis). It can also be called a myocardial infarction. The
main risk is that the heart will stop beating.
The effects of a heart attack depend largely on how much
of the heart muscle is affected; many casualities recover
completely. Aspirin can be used to try to limit the extent of
damage to the heart muscle.
WHAT TO DO
Call 911 for emergency help. Tell the dispatcher that you
suspect a heart attack. If the casualty asks you to do so,
call his own doctor too.
Make the casualty as
comfortable as possibleto
ease the strain on his heart. A halfsitting position, with his head and
shoulders supported and his knees
bent, is often best. Place cushions
behind him and under his knees.
Assist the casualty to take
up to one full-dose adult
aspirin tablet (325 mg) or four
baby aspirin (81 mg each). Advise
him to chew it slowly.
If the casualty has angina
medication, such as tablets
or a pump-action or aerosol
spray, let him administer it;
help him if necessary.
Encourage him to rest.
Monitor and record vital
signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)
—while waiting for help. Stay
calm to avoid undue stress.
1
2
3
4
5
Coronary thrombosis
Coronary arteries supply
blood to the heart muscle.
When an artery is blocked,
for example by a blood
clot, the muscle beyond
the blockage is deprived
of oxygen and other
nutrients carried by the
blood, and begins to die.
Area deprived
of oxygen and
nutrients
Coronary
arteries
Site of
blockage in
coronary
artery
CAUTION
SEE ALSO The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
212
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
STROKE
 ■ Facial weakness—the casualty is
unable to smile evenly and the mouth
or eye may be droopy
 ■ Arm weakness—the casualty is only
able to raise one arm
 ■ Speech problems—the casualty is
unable to speak clearly
There may also be:
 ■ Sudden weakness or numbness of
the face, arm, or leg on one or both
sides of the body
 ■ Sudden loss or blurring of vision in
one or both eyes
 ■ Sudden difficulty with speech or
understanding the spoken word
 ■ Sudden confusion
 ■ Sudden severe headache with no
apparent cause
 ■ Dizziness, unsteadiness,
or sudden fall
RECOGNITION
A stroke or brain attack is a medical emergency that occurs
when the blood supply to the brain is disrupted. Strokes
are the third most common cause of death in the US and many
people live with long-term disability as a result of a stroke. This
condition is more common later in life and is associated with
disorders of the circulatory system, such as high blood pressure.
The majority of strokes are caused by a clot in a blood vessel
that blocks the flow of blood to the brain. However, some strokes
are the result of a ruptured blood vessel that causes bleeding
into the brain. If a stroke is due to a blood clot, it may be possible
to give drugs to limit the extent of damage to the brain and
improve recovery. The earlier the casualty receives care in the
hospital, the better.
Use the FAST (Face-Arm-Speech-Time) guide if you suspect a
casualty has had a stroke:
F – Facial weakness—the casualty is unable to smile evenly
and the mouth or eye may be droopy
A – Arm weakness—the casualty is only able to raise one of
his arms
S – Speech problems—the casualty is unable to speak clearly
or may not understand the spoken word
T – Time to call 911 for emergency help if you suspect
that the casualty has had a stroke.
TRANSIENT ISCHEMIC ATTACK (TIA)
A transient ischemic attack, or TIA, is sometimes called
a mini-stroke. It is similar to a full stroke, but the symptoms may
last only a few minutes, will improve, and eventually disappear.
If you suspect a TIA, it is important to seek medical advice to
confirm the casualty’s condition. If there is any doubt, assume
that it is a stroke.
 ■ To arrange urgent admission to
the hospital
 ■ To reassure and comfort the casualty
YOUR AIMS
 ■ If the person loses
consciousness and is
not breathing (or just gasping),
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
Bleeding into brain
Site of clot
BLOCKED BLOOD VESSEL BURST BLOOD VESSEL
Area deprived
of oxygen
Damaged
blood vessel
Causes of a stroke
Any disruption to the flow of blood
to the brain starves the affected
part of the brain of oxygen and
nutrients. This can cause temporary
or permanent loss of function in
that area of the brain. A stroke can
result from a blood clot that blocks
an artery supplying blood to the
brain (right), or from a burst blood
vessel that causes bleeding which
presses on the brain (far right).
CAUTION
SEE ALSO The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
213
STROKE
WHAT TO DO
Look at the
casualty’s face. Ask
him to smile; if he has
had a stroke he may only
be able to smile on one
side—the other side of
his mouth may droop.
Ask the casualty to raise both his arms; if
he has had a stroke, he may be able to lift
only one arm.
2
1
Find out whether the person can speak clearly
and understand what you say. When you ask a
question, does he respond appropriately to you?
3
Call 911 for emergency help. Tell the
dispatcher that you have used the FAST guide
and you suspect a stroke.
4
Keep the casualty comfortable and supported.
If the casualty is conscious, you can help him
lie down. Reassure him that help is on the way.
5
Regularly monitor and record vital signs—level
of response, breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)—
while waiting for help to arrive. Do not give the
casualty anything to eat or drink because it may be
difficult for him to swallow.
6
214
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
This is a long-term (chronic) condition in
which the body fails to produce sufficient
insulin. Insulin is a chemical produced by the
pancreas (a gland that lies behind the stomach),
which regulates the blood sugar (glucose) level
in the body. Diabetes can result in higher than
normal blood sugar (hyperglycemia) or lower
than normal blood sugar (hypoglycemia). If a
person with diabetes is unwell, giving him sugar
will rapidly correct hypoglycemia and is unlikely
to do harm in cases of hyperglycemia.
TYPES OF DIABETES
There are two types: Type 1, or insulindependent diabetes, and Type 2, also known as
non-insulin-dpendent diabetes.
In Type 1 diabetes, the body produces little
or no insulin. People with Type 1 diabetes need
regular insulin injections throughout their lives.
Type 1 diabetes is sometimes referred to as
juvenile diabetes or early-onset diabetes
because it usually develops in childhood or
the teenage years. Insulin can be administered
using an insulin syringe, an injection pen, or a
special pump. The pump is a small device about
the size of a pack of cards, strapped to the
person’s body. The insulin is administered via
a piece of tubing that leads from the pump to a
needle just under the skin.
In Type 2 diabetes, the body does not make
enough insulin or cannot use it properly. This
type is usually linked with obesity, and is also
known as maturity-onset diabetes because it
is more common in people over the age of 40.
The risk of developing this type is increased if
it runs in your family. Type 2 diabetes can
sometimes be controlled with diet, weight loss,
and regular exercise. However, oral medication
and, in some cases, insulin injections may
be needed.
WHAT TO DO
DIABETES MELLITUS
High blood sugar (hyperglycemia) may develop slowly over a
period of hours or days. If it is not treated, hyperglycemia will
result in unconsciousness (diabetic coma) and therefore requires
urgent treatment in the hospital. Those who suffer from
hyperglycemia may wear warning bracelets, cards, or medallions
alerting a first aider to the condition.
 ■ Warm, dry skin
 ■ Rapid pulse and breathing
 ■ Fruity sweet breath and
excessive thirst
 ■ Drowsiness, leading to
unconsciousness if untreated
RECOGNITION
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing (or just gasping),
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
Monitor and record
vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—while waiting for
help to arrive.
2 Call 911 for emergency
help; tell dispatcher that
you suspect hyperglycemia.
1
SEE ALSO The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
 ■ To arrange urgent removal to
the hospital.
YOUR AIM
HYPERGLYCEMIA
CAUTION
215
DIABETES MELLITUS | HYPERGLYCEMIA | HYPOGLYCEMIA
HYPOGLYCEMIA
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty sit down. If he has his own glucose gel or
tablets, help him take it. If not, give him the equivalent of 10 g of
glucose—for example, an 8 oz glass of nondiet carbonated beverage
or fruit juice, two teaspoons of sugar (or two lumps of sugar), or
sugary candy such as hard candies.
If the casualty responds quickly, give him more food or drink and
let him rest until he feels better. Help him find his glucose testing
kit so that he can check his glucose level. Monitor him until he is
completely recovered.
If the casualty’s condition does not improve, look for other
possible causes. Call 911 for emergency help and monitor and
record vital signs—level of response, breathing, and pulse (pp.52–53)—
while waiting for help to arrive.
2
1
There may be:
 ■ A history of diabetes—the casualty
himself may recognize the onset of a
hypoglycemic attack
 ■ Weakness, faintness, or hunger
 ■ Confusion and irrational behavior
 ■ Sweating with cold, clammy skin
 ■ Rapid pulse
 ■ Palpitations and muscle tremors
 ■ Deteriorating level of response
 ■ Medical warning bracelet
or necklace, and glucose gel or
tablets
 ■ Medication such as an insulin pen or
tablets, and a glucose testing kit
RECOGNITION
This condition occurs when the blood sugar level falls
below normal. It is characterized by a rapidly deteriorating
level of response. Hypoglycemia develops if the insulin–sugar
balance is incorrect; for example, when a person with diabetes
misses a meal or does too much exercise. It is common in a
person with newly diagnosed diabetes while he is learning to
balance sugar levels. More rarely, hypoglycemia may develop
following an epileptic seizure (pp.216–17) or after an episode
of binge drinking.
People with diabetes may carry their own blood-testing
kits to check their blood sugar levels, as well as their insulin
medication, so they are well prepared for emergencies; for
example, many carry sugar, candy, or a tube of glucose gel.
If the hypoglycemic attack is at an advanced stage,
consciousness may be impaired and you must seek
emergency help.
SEE ALSO Alcohol poisoning p.202 | Head injury pp.144–45 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
 ■ To raise the sugar content
of the blood as quickly as possible
 ■ To obtain appropriate medical help
YOUR AIMS
 ■ If consciousness is impaired,
do not give the casualty
anything to eat or drink.
 ■ If the person loses
consciousness and is not
breathing (or just gasping),
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.54–87).
3
CAUTION
216
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
SEIZURES IN ADULTS
 ■ Do not move the casualty unless
he is in immediate danger
or is vomiting.
 ■ Do not put anything in his
mouth or attempt to restrain
him during a seizure.
Call 911 for emergency help if:
 ■ The casualty is having repeated
seizures or having his
first seizure.
 ■ The casualty is not aware of any
reason for the seizure.
 ■ The seizure continues for more
than five minutes.
 ■ The casualty is unconscious for
more than ten minutes.
 ■ The casualty has sustained
an injury to another part of
the body.
A seizure—also called a convulsion—consists of involuntary
contractions of many of the muscles in the body. The condition is
due to a disturbance in the electrical activity of the brain.
Seizures usually result in loss or impairment of consciousness.
The most common cause is epilepsy. Other causes include head
injury, some brain-damaging diseases, shortage of oxygen or
glucose in the brain, and the intake of certain poisons, including
alcohol or drugs.
Epileptic seizures result from recurrent, major disturbances of
brain activity. These seizures can be sudden and dramatic. Just
before a seizure, a casualty may have a brief warning period (aura)
with, for example, a strange feeling or a particular smell or taste.
No matter what the cause of the seizure, care must always
include maintaining an open, clear airway and a monitoring of
the casualty’s vital signs—level of response, breathing, and pulse.
You will also need to protect the casualty from further harm
during a seizure and arrange appropriate aftercare once
he has recovered.
 ■ Help him sit down in a quiet place
 ■ Remove any potentially dangerous
items such as hot drinks and sharp
objects
 ■ Talk to him in a calm and
reassuring way and stay with him
until he has fully recovered
 ■ Advise him to seek medical advice
if he is unaware of his condition or
does not fully recover.
Some people experience a mild
form of epilepsy known as absence
seizures, during which they appear
distant and unaware of their
surroundings. These seizures tend to
affect children more than adults, and
a more severe seizure with
convulsions may follow. A casualty
may suddenly “switch off” and stare
blankly ahaed. You may notice slight
or localized twitching or jerking of
the lips, eyelids, head, or limbs and/
or odd “automatic” movements, such
as lip-smacking or making noises. If a
casualty has an absence seizure:
CAUTION
SPECIAL CASE ABSENCE SEIZURES
217
SEIZURES IN ADULTS
WHAT TO DO
Make space around the casualty, and ask bystanders to move
away. Remove potentially dangerous items, such as hot drinks and
sharp objects. Note the time that the seizure started.
Protect the casualty’s head from objects nearby; place soft
padding such as rolled towels underneath or around his neck if
possible. Loosen tight clothing around his neck if necessary.
2
1
RECOGNITION
 ■ To protect the casualty from injury
during the seizure
 ■ To care for the casualty when
consciousness is regained and
arrange removal to the hospital
if necessary
YOUR AIMS
When the convulsive movements have ceased, open the
casualty’s airway and check breathing. If he is breathing, place
him in the recovery position.
Monitor and record his vital signs—level of response, breathing,
and pulse (pp.52–53)—until he recovers. Make a note of how long
the seizure lasted.
4
3
SEE ALSO Head injury pp.144–45 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
In epilepsy, the following sequence
is common:
 ■ Sudden loss of consciousness
 ■ Casualty becomes rigid and arches
his back
 ■ Breathing may be noisy and become
difficult—the lips may show a grayblue tinge (cyanosis)
 ■ Convulsive movements begin
 ■ Saliva may appear at the mouth and
may be bloodstained if the lips or
tongue have been bitten
 ■ Possible loss of bladder or
bowel control
 ■ Muscles relax and breathing
becomes normal; the casualty
recovers consciousness, usually
within a few minutes. He may feel
dazed, or act strangely. He may be
unaware of his actions
 ■ After a seizure, the casualty may feel
tired and fall into a deep sleep
218
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
SEE ALSO Unconscious child pp.72–79 | Unconscious infant pp.80–83
 ■ Vigorous shaking, with clenched fists
and an arched back.
There may also be:
 ■ Obvious signs of fever: hot, flushed
skin and perhaps sweating
 ■ Twitching of the face and squinting,
fixed or upturned eyes
 ■ Breath-holding, with red, “puffy” face
and neck and drooling
 ■ Possible vomiting
 ■ Loss of bowel or bladder control
 ■ Loss of or impaired consciousness
 ■ To protect the child from injury
during the seizure
 ■ To cool the child
 ■ To reassure the parents
 ■ To arrange removal to the hospital
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
In young children, seizures—sometimes called convulsions—are
most often the result of a raised body temperature associated
with a throat or ear infection or other infections. This type of
seizure, also known as a febrile seizure, occurs because the
electrical systems in the brain are not mature enough to deal
with the body’s high temperature.
Although seizures can be alarming, they are rarely dangerous
if properly dealt with. However, you should always seek medical
advice for the child to rule out any serious underlying condition.
WHAT TO DO
Place pillows or soft padding around the child so that even
violent movement will not result in injury. Do not restrain the
child in any way.
Reassure the child as well as the parents
or caregiver. Monitor and record vital
signs—level of response, breathing, and pulse
(pp.52–53)—until emergency help arrives.
Once the seizures have stopped, maintain an
open airway by placing the casualty in the
recovery position. Call 911 for emergency help.
If the child’s seizure was caused by a fever, cool
him by removing any bedding and clothes, for
example T-shirt or pajama top; you may have to
wait until the seizure stops. Ensure a good supply
of fresh air (but do not overcool the child).
1
4
2 3
SEIZURES IN CHILDREN
 ■ Do not over- or under-dress a
child with fever; do not sponge
a child to cool her because there
is a risk of overcooling.
CAUTION
219
SEIZURES IN CHILDREN | FEVER
FEVER
SEE ALSO | Meningitis p.220 | Seizures in children opposite
 ■ Raised body temperature above
100.4ºF (38ºC)
 ■ Pallor; casualty may feel cold with
goose pimples, shivering, and
chattering teeth
Later:
 ■ Hot, flushed skin and sweating
 ■ Headache
 ■ Generalized aches and pains
RECOGNITION
 ■ If you are concerned about
the casualty’s condition, seek
medical advice.
 ■ Do not over- or under-dress a
child with fever; do not sponge
a child to cool her because there
is a risk of overcooling.
 ■ Do not give aspirin to any
person under 16 years of age.
WHAT TO DO
Keep casualty cool and comfortable—preferably in bed with
a light covering.
Monitor and record a casualty’s vital signs—level of response,
breathing, pulse, and temperature (pp.52–53)—until she recovers.
Give her plenty of cool drinks to replace body fluids lost
through sweating.
If the child appears distressed or ill, she may have the
recommended dose of acetaminophen syrup (not aspirin).
An adult may take the recommended dose of acetaminophen or
ibuprofen, or his own pain relievers.
4
2
1
3
The normal body temperature varies, but it is approximately
98.6ºF (37ºC). Fever is generally defined as a temperature over
100.4ºF (38ºC). It is usually caused by a bacterial or viral
infection, and may be associated with earache, sore throat,
measles, chickenpox, meningitis (p.220) or local infection, such
as an abscess. The infection may have been acquired during
overseas travel.
In young children, fever can be a symptom of or a precursor to
serious illnesses. See list at right, and if you are in any doubt
about a casualty’s condition, seek medical advice.
CAUTION
 ■ To bring down the fever
To obtain medical aid if necessary,
for:
 ■ An infant less than 3 months of age
with a rectal temperature of 100.4ºF
(38ºC) or higher
 ■ A child 3 months – 3 years old with a
rectal temperature of 100.4ºF (38ºC)
or higher for more than three days or
who appears ill or fussy
 ■ A child 3 months – 3 years old with a
rectal temperature of 102ºF (38.9ºC)
or higher
 ■ A child of any age with a temperature
of 104ºF (40ºC) or higher
 ■ A child of any age who has a febrile
seizure
 ■ A child of any age who has a chronic
medical problem
 ■ An infant or child of any age who has
a fever as well as a new skin rash
YOUR AIMS
220
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
The symptoms and signs are
usually not all present at the same
time. They include:
 ■ Flulike illness with a high
temperature
 ■ Cold hands and feet
 ■ Joint and limb pain
 ■ Mottled or very pale skin.
As the infection develops:
 ■ Severe headache
 ■ Neck stiffness (the casualty will not
be able to touch her chest with
her chin)
 ■ Vomiting
 ■ Eyes become very sensitive to any
light—daylight, electric light, or even
the television
 ■ Drowsiness
 ■ In infants, there may also be highpitched moaning or a whimpering
cry, floppiness, and a tense or bulging
fontanelle (soft part of the skull)
Later:
 ■ A distinctive rash of red or purple
spots that do not fade when pressed
 ■ To obtain urgent medical help
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIM
This is a condition in which the linings that surround the brain
and the spinal cord become inflamed. It can be caused by
bacteria or a virus and can affect any age group.
Meningitis may be a very serious illness and the casualty may
deteriorate very quickly. If you suspect meningitis, you must seek
urgent medical assistance because prompt treatment in the
hospital is vital. For this reason it is important that you can
recognize the symptoms of meningitis, which may include a high
temperature, headache, and a distinctive rash. With early
diagnosis and treatment, full recovery is possible.
WHAT TO DO
Seek urgent medical advice
if you notice any of the
signs of meningitis; for example,
shielding eyes from the light.
Do not wait for all the symptoms
and signs to appear because
they may not all develop. Treat
the fever p.219.
Check the casualty for signs
of a rash. On dark skin,
check on lighter parts of the
body; for example, the inner
eyelids or fingertips. If you
see any signs, call 911 for
emergency help.
1 2
MENINGITIS
 ■ If a casualty’s condition is
deteriorating, and you suspect
meningitis, call 911 for
emergency help even if she has
already seen a doctor.
While waiting for help
to arrive, reassure the
casualty and keep her cool.
Monitor and record vital signs—
level of response, breathing, and
pulse (pp.52–53).
3
Accompanying the later stage of
meningitis is a distinctive red or
purple rash that does not fade if
you press it. If you press the side
of a glass firmly against most
rashes they will fade; if a rash
does not fade, call 911 for
emergency help immediately.
IMPORTANT MENINGITIS RASH
CAUTION
SEE ALSO Fever p.219
221
MENINGITIS | FAINTING
SEE ALSO The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
 ■ Brief loss of consciousness
that causes the casualty to fall
to the ground
 ■ A slow pulse
 ■ Pale, cold skin and sweating
 ■ To improve blood flow to
the brain
 ■ To reassure the casualty and make
him comfortable
Fainting is a brief loss of consciousness caused by a temporary
reduction of the blood flow to the brain. It may be a reaction to
pain, exhaustion, lack of food, or emotional stress. It is also
common after long periods of physical inactivity, such as
standing or sitting still, especially in a warm atmosphere. This
inactivity causes blood to pool in the legs, reducing the amount
of blood reaching the brain.
When a person faints, the pulse rate becomes very slow.
However, the rate soon picks up and returns to normal. A
casualty who has fainted usually makes a rapid and complete
recovery. Do not advise a person who feels faint to sit on a chair
with his head between his knees because if he faints he may
fall and injure himself. If the casualty is a woman in the late
stages of pregnancy, help her lie down so that she is leaning
toward her left side to prevent the pregnant uterus from
restricting blood flow back to her heart.
WHAT TO DO
When a casualty feels
faint, advise him to lie
down. Kneel down, raise his legs,
supporting his ankles on your
shoulders to improve blood flow
to the brain. Watch his face for
signs of recovery.
Make sure that the casualty
has plenty of fresh air; ask
someone to open a window if
you are indoors. In addition, ask
any bystanders to stand clear.
He may be more comfortable
if his knees are bent.
As the casualty recovers,
reassure him and help him
sit up gradually. If he starts to
feel faint again, advise him to
lie down once again, and raise
and support his legs until he
recovers fully.
1 2 3
FAINTING
 ■ If the casualty does not regain
consciousness quickly and is not
breathing normally, begin CPR
with compressions (pp.54–87).
RECOGNITION
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
222
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
An allergy is an abnormal reaction of the body’s defense
system (immune response) to a normally harmless “trigger”
substance (or allergen). An allergy can present itself as a mild
itching, swelling, wheezing, or digestive condition, or can
progress to full-blown anaphylaxis, or anaphylactic shock
(opposite), which can occur within seconds or minutes of
exposure to an offending allergen.
Common allergy triggers include pollen, dust, nuts,
shellfish, eggs, wasp and bee stings, latex, and certain
medications. Skin changes can be subtle, absent, or variable
in some cases.
ALLERGY
WHAT TO DO
Assess the casualty’s signs and symptoms. Ask if she has any
known allergy.
Remove the trigger if possible, or move the casualty from
the trigger. 2
1
SEE ALSO Anaphylactic shock opposite | Asthma p.102
Features of mild allergy vary
depending on the trigger and the
person. There may be:
 ■ Red, itchy rash or raised areas of
skin (hives)
 ■ Red, itchy eyes
 ■ Wheezing and/or difficulty breathing
 ■ Swelling of hands, feet, and/or face
 ■ Abdominal pain, vomiting,
and diarrhea
RECOGNITION
 ■ Call 911 for emergency help if
the casualty does not improve,
she has difficulty breathing, or is
becoming distressed. Monitor
and record vital signs (pp.52–53)
while waiting for help.
 ■ To assess the severity of the
allergic reaction
 ■ To seek medical advice if necessary
YOUR AIMS
Treat any symptoms. Allow the casualty to take her own
medication for a known allergy. 3
If you are at all concerned about the casualty’s condition, seek
medical advice. 4
CAUTION
223
ALLERGY | ANAPHYLACTIC SHOCK
ANAPHYLACTIC SHOCK
SEE ALSO Hypoxia p.92 | Shock pp.112–13 | The unconscious casualty pp.54–87
WHAT TO DO
Call 911 for emergency
help. Tell the dispatcher
that you suspect anaphylaxis.
If the casualty has an autoinjector of epinephrine, help
her use it. If she is unable to take
the medication, administer it to
her yourself. Pull off the safety
cap and, holding the injector
with your fist, push the tip firmly
against the casualty's thigh
until it clicks, releasing the
medication (it can be delivered
through clothing). Hold for
ten seconds, remove the
autoinjector, then massage the
injection site for ten seconds.
Help the casualty sit up in
the position that best
relieves any breathing difficulty.
If she becomes pale with a weak
pulse, help her lie down with
legs raised and treat for shock
(pp.112–113).
2
1 3
Features of allergy (opposite) may
be present:
 ■ Red, itchy rash or raised areas of
skin (hives)
 ■ Red itchy, watery eyes
 ■ Swelling of hands, feet, and/or face
 ■ Abdominal pain, vomiting,
and diarrhea
There may also be:
 ■ Difficulty breathing, ranging from a
tight chest to severe difficulty,
causing the casualty to wheeze and
gasp for air
 ■ Pale or flushed skin
 ■ Visible swelling of tongue and throat
with puffiness around the eyes
 ■ Feeling of terror
 ■ Confusion and agitation
 ■ Signs of shock, leading to collapse
and loss of consciousness
RECOGNITION
This is a severe allergic reaction affecting the whole body.
It may develop within seconds or minutes of contact with
a trigger and is potentially fatal. In an anaphylactic reaction,
chemicals are released into the blood that widen (dilate) blood
vessels. This causes blood pressure to fall and air passages to
narrow (constrict), resulting in breathing difficulties. In addition,
the tongue and throat can swell, obstructing the airway. The
amount of oxygen reaching the vital organs can be severely
reduced, causing hypoxia (p.92). Common triggers include: nuts,
shellfish, eggs, wasp and bee stings, latex, and certain medications.
A casualty with anaphylactic shock needs emergency
treatment with an injection of epinephrine.
 ■ If a pregnant casualty needs to
lie down, lean her toward her
left side to prevent the pregnant
uterus from restricting blood
flow back to the heart.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing normally, begin CPR
with chest compressions
(pp.54–87).
 ■ To ease breathing
 ■ To treat shock
 ■ To arrange urgent removal
to the hospital
YOUR AIMS
Monitor and record vital
signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse (pp.52–
53)—while waiting for help
to arrive. Repeated doses of
epinephrine can be given at
five-minute intervals if there
is no improvement or the
symptoms return.
4
CAUTION
224
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
 ■ To relieve the pain
 ■ To obtain medical advice if necessary
YOUR AIMS
A headache may accompany any illness, particularly a feverish
ailment such as flu. It may develop for no reason, but can often
be traced to fatigue, tension, stress, or undue heat or cold. Mild
“poisoning” caused by a stuffy or fume-filled atmosphere, or by
excess alcohol or any other drug, can also induce a headache.
However, a headache may also be the most prominent symptom
of meningitis or a stroke.
WHAT TO DO
HEADACHE
 ■ Do not give aspirin to anyone
under 16 years of age.
Seek urgent medical advice if
the pain:
 ■ Develops very suddenly.
 ■ Is severe and incapacitating.
 ■ Is accompanied by fever
or vomiting.
 ■ Is recurrent or persistent.
 ■ Is accompanied by loss of
strength or sensation, or by
impaired consciousness.
 ■ Is accompanied by a stiff neck
and sensitivity to light.
 ■ Follows a head injury.
WHAT TO DO
Help the casualty sit or lie
down in a quiet place.
Give him a cold compress to
hold against his head (p.241).
An adult may take the
recommended dose of
acetaminophen tablets or his
own pain relievers. A child may
have the recommended dose
of acetaminophen syrup
(not aspirin).
2
1
Migraine attacks are severe, “sickening” headaches and can be
triggered by a variety of causes, such as allergy, stress, or fatigue.
Other triggers include lack of sleep, missed meals, alcohol, and
some foods—for example, cheese or chocolate. Migraine
sufferers usually know how to recognize and deal with attacks
and may carry their own medication.
 ■ Before the attack there may be
disturbance of vision in the form of
flickering lights or an aura
 ■ Intense throbbing headache, which is
sometimes on just one side of the head
 ■ Abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting
 ■ Inability to tolerate bright light or
loud noise
RECOGNITION
 ■ To relieve the pain.
 ■ To obtain medical advice
if necessary.
Advise the casualty to lie
down or sleep for a few
hours in a quiet, dark room.
Provide him with some
towels and a container in
case he vomits.
2 Help the casualty take any
medication that he may
have for migraine attacks.
1
If this is the first attack,
advise the casualty to seek
medical advice.
3
SEE ALSO Head injury pp.144–45 | Meningitis p.220 | Stroke pp.212–13
MIGRAINE
 ■ To relieve the pain
 ■ To obtain medical aid if necessary
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
CAUTION
225
SORE THROAT | HEADACHE | MIGRAINE | EARACHE AND TOOTHACHE
EARACHE AND TOOTHACHE
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO
An adult may take the
recommended dose of
acetaminophen or ibuprofen
tablets or her own pain relievers.
A child may have the
recommended dose of
acetaminophen syrup.
Give her a source of heat,
such as a hot water bottle
wrapped in a towel, to hold against
the affected side of her face.
For toothache, you can
apply benzocaine, in
many tooth pain products,
to the painful tooth.
2
1 3
 ■ To relieve the pain
 ■ To obtain medical or dental advice if
necessary
YOUR AIMS
Earache can result from inflammation of the outer, middle, or inner
ear, often caused by an infection associated with a cold, tonsillitis, or
flu. It can also be caused by a boil, an object stuck in the ear canal, or
transmitted pain from a tooth abscess. There may also be temporary
hearing loss. Earache often occurs when flying as a result of the
changes in air pressure during ascent and descent. Infection can
cause pus to collect in the middle ear; the eardrum may rupture,
allowing the pus to drain, which temporarily eases the pain.
Toothache can develop when pulp inside a tooth becomes
inflamed due to dental decay. If untreated, the pulp becomes
infected, leading to an abscess, which causes a throbbing
pain. Infection may cause swelling around the tooth or jaw.
 ■ Do not give aspirin to anyone
under 16 years of age.
 ■ If there is a discharge from an
ear, fever, or hearing loss, obtain
medical help.
Advise a casualty to
seek medical advice
if you are concerned,
particularly if the casualty
is a child. If a casualty has
toothache, advise her to
see her dentist.
4
The most common sore throat is a “raw” feeling caused by
inflammation, which is often the first sign of a cough or cold.
Tonsillitis occurs when the tonsils at the back of the throat are
infected. The tonsils become red and swollen and white spots of
pus may be seen. Swallowing may be difficult and the glands at
the angle of the jaw may be enlarged and sore.
 ■ To relieve the pain
 ■ To obtain medical advice
if necessary
YOUR AIMS
 ■ Do not give aspirin to anyone
under 16 years of age.
 ■ If you suspect tonsillitis,
tell the casualty to seek
medical advice.
An adult may take the
recommended dose of
acetaminophen tablets or his own
pain relievers. A child may have
acetaminophen syrup.
2 Give the casualty
plenty of cold fluids
to help ease the pain and
keep the throat from
becoming dry.
1
SEE ALSO Foreign object in the ear p.197
SORE THROAT
CAUTION
CAUTION
226
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
 ■ To relieve pain and discomfort
 ■ To obtain medical help if necessary
YOUR AIMS
Pain in the abdomen often has a relatively minor cause, such
as food poisoning. The pain of a stitch usually occurs during
exercise and is sharp. Distension (widening) or obstruction of
the intestine causes colic—pain that comes and goes in waves—
which often makes the casualty double up in agony and may be
accompanied by vomiting.
Occasionally abdominal pain is a sign of a serious disorder
affecting the organs and other structures in the abdomen.
If the appendix bursts, or the intestine is damaged, the contents
of the intestine can leak into the abdominal cavity, causing
inflammation of the cavity lining. This life-threatening condition,
called peritonitis, causes intense pain, which is made worse
by movement or pressure on the abdomen, and will lead to
shock (pp.112–13).
An inflamed appendix (appendicitis) is especially common in
children. Symptoms include pain (often starting in the center of
the abdomen and moving to the lower right-hand side), loss of
appetite, nausea, vomiting, bad breath, and fever. If the appendix
bursts, peritonitis will develop. The treatment is urgent surgical
removal of the appendix.
ABDOMINAL PAIN
 ■ If the pain is severe, or occurs
with fever and vomiting, call 911
for emergency help. Treat the
casualty for shock (pp.112–13).
Do not give her medicine or
allow her to eat or drink,
because an anesthetic may
be needed.
WHAT TO DO
Reassure the casualty and make her comfortable. Prop her up
if she finds breathing difficult. Give her a container to use if
she is vomiting.
Give the casualty a hot-water bottle wrapped in a towel to hold
against her abdomen. If in doubt about her condition, seek
medical advice.
2
1
SEE ALSO Shock pp.112–13
This common condition is a form
of cramp, usually associated with
exercise, which occurs in the trunk
or the sides of the chest. The most
likely cause is a buildup in the
muscles of chemical waste
products, such as lactic acid, during
physical exertion. Help the casualty
sit down and reassure him. The
pain will usually ease quickly. If
the pain does not disappear within
a few minutes, or if you are
concerned about the casualty’s
condition, seek medical advice.
CAUTION
SPECIAL CASE STITCH
227
ABDOMINAL PAIN | VOMITING AND DIARRHEA
VOMITING AND DIARRHEA
SEE ALSO Drug poisoning p.201 | Swallowed poisons p.200
WHAT TO DO
Reassure the casualty if she is vomiting and
give her a warm damp cloth to wipe her face.
Help her sit down and when the vomiting
stops give her water or unsweetened fruit juice
to sip slowly and often.
When the casualty is hungry again, advise
her to eat easily digested foods such as pasta,
bread, or potatoes for the first 24 hours.
2
1
3
4
There may be:
 ■ Nausea
 ■ Vomiting and later diarrhea
 ■ Stomach pains
 ■ Fever
RECOGNITION
These problems are usually due to irritation of the digestive
system. Diarrhea and vomiting can be caused by a number of
different organisms, including viruses, bacteria, and parasites.
They usually result from consuming contaminated food or water,
but infection can be passed from person to person. Good
hygiene helps prevent infectious diarrhea.
Vomiting and diarrhea may occur either separately or
together. Both conditions can cause the body to lose vital fluids
and salts, resulting in dehydration. When they occur together,
the risk of dehydration is increased and can be serious, especially
in infants, young children, and elderly people.
The aim of treatment is to prevent dehydration by giving
frequent sips of water or unsweetened fruit juice, even if the
casualty is vomiting. Dehydration products, whether added
to water or sold in liquid form, provide the correct balance of
water and salt to replace those lost through the vomiting and
diarrhea and can be purchased at a pharmacy.
 ■ Do not give
antidiarrhea medicines.
 ■ If you are concerned about
a casualty’s condition, especially
if the vomiting or diarrhea is
persistent, or the casualty is a
young child or an older person,
seek medical advice.
 ■ To reassure the casualty
 ■ To restore lost fluids and salts
YOUR AIMS
CAUTION
If the vomiting and/or diarrhea are severe, or the
casualty develops chest pain, difficulty breathing,
or severe abdominal pain, take or arrange to send her
to the hospital. If the casualty becomes lightheaded
or dizzy, treat for fainting (p.221).
228
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
 ■ To obtain medical help or arrange
for the woman to be taken to
the hospital
 ■ To ensure privacy, reassure the
woman and make her comfortable
 ■ To prevent infection in the mother,
baby, and yourself
 ■ To care for the baby during and
after delivery
YOUR AIMS Childbirth is a natural and often lengthy process that normally
occurs at about the 40th week of pregnancy. There is usually
plenty of time to get a woman to the hospital, or get help to her,
before the baby arrives. Most pregnant women are aware of
what happens during childbirth, but a woman who goes into
labor unexpectedly or early may be very anxious. You will need
to reassure her and make her comfortable. Miscarriage, however,
is potentially serious because there is a risk of severe bleeding. A
woman who is miscarrying needs urgent medical help (p.128).
There are three distinct stages to childbirth. In the first stage,
the baby gets into position for the birth. The baby is born in the
second stage, and in the third stage, the afterbirth (placenta and
umbilical cord) is delivered.
First stage
In this stage, a woman’s body begins
to experience contractions, which,
together with the pressure of the
baby’s head, cause the cervix (neck
of the uterus/womb) to open. The
contractions become stronger and
more frequent until the cervix is
fully dilated (open)—about 4 in
(10 cm)—and ready for the baby to
be born. During this first stage, the
mucous plug that protects the
uterus from infection is expelled
and the amniotic fluid surrounding
the baby leaks out from the vagina.
This stage can take several hours for
a first baby but is normally shorter
in any subsequent pregnancies.
Second stage
Once the cervix is fully dilated, the
baby’s head will press down on the
mother’s pelvic floor, triggering a
strong urge to push. The birth canal
(vagina) stretches as the baby
travels through it. The baby’s head
normally emerges first, and the
body is delivered soon afterward.
This stage of labor normally lasts
about an hour.
Third stage
About 10–30 minutes after the baby
is born, the placenta (the organ that
nourishes the unborn baby) and the
umbilical cord will be expelled from
the uterus. The uterus begins to
contract again, pushing the placenta
out, then it closes down the area
where it was attached; this reduces
the bleeding.
CHILDBIRTH
Placenta detaches from
wall of uterus
Baby’s head
presses against
cervix
Baby
emerges
Uterus contracts
to push baby
down
Birth canal
fully dilated
Umbilical cord
SEE ALSO Shock pp.112–13 | Vaginal bleeding p.128
229
CHILDBIRTH | EMERGENCY CHILDBIRTH
EMERGENCY CHILDBIRTH
 ■ Do not give the mother anything to eat because there is a risk
that she may vomit. If she is thirsty give her sips of water.
 ■ Do not pull on the baby’s head or shoulders during delivery.
 ■ If the umbilical cord is wrapped around the baby’s neck as he is
born, check that it is loose, and then very carefully ease it over
the baby’s head to prevent strangulation.
 ■ If a newborn baby does not cry, open the airway and check
breathing (Unconscious infant pp. 80–83). Do not slap the baby.
 ■ Do not pull or cut the umbilical cord, even when the placenta has
been delivered.
WHAT TO DO
Call 911 for emergency help. Give the 911
dispatcher details of the stage the mother has
reached, the length of each contraction and the
intervals between them. Follow the instructions of
the dispatcher.
As the baby is born, handle him carefully—
newborns are very slippery. Make sure
he is breathing, wrap him in a clean cloth, towel, or
blanket, and place him between his mother’s legs
so he is on the same level as the afterbirth.
As the third stage begins, reassure the mother.
Support her as she delivers the afterbirth; do
not cut the cord. Keep the placenta and the
umbilical cord intact because the doctor or
ambulance crew need to check that it is complete. If
bleeding or pain is severe, treat for shock (pp.112–13).
Help the mother lie down and raise her legs.
When the second stage starts, the mother will
want to push. Make sure the surroundings are
as clean as possible to reduce the risk of infection.
The mother should remove any items of clothing
that could interfere with the birth. Put clean sheets
or towels under the woman; she may also want to
be covered. Encourage her to stay as upright
as possible.
During the first stage, help her sit or kneel on
the floor in a comfortable position. Support her
with cushions or let her move around. Stay calm,
and encourage her to breathe deeply during
her contractions.
Massage her lower back gently using the heel
of your hand. She may find having her face and
hands wiped soothing, or you can spray her face
with cool water and give her ice cubes to suck.
4
5
6
2
1
3
In the rare event of a baby arriving
quickly, you should not try to “deliver”
the baby; the birth will happen
naturally without intervention. Your
role is to comfort and listen to the
wishes of the mother and care for her
and her baby.
CAUTION
SEE ALSO Shock pp.112–13 | Vaginal bleeding p.128
This chapter outlines the techniques and
procedures that underpin first aid,
including moving a casualty and applying
dressings and bandages. Usually, a first
aider is not expected to move an injured
person, but in some circumstances—such as
when a casualty is in immediate danger—it
may be necessary. The key principles for
moving casualties are described here.
Information is also given on making an
assessment of the risks involved in moving
a casualty or assisting a casualty to safety.
A guide to the equipment and materials
commonly found in a first aid kit is given,
with information on how and when to use
them. Applying dressings and bandages
effectively is an essential part of first aid:
wounds usually require a dressing, and
almost all injuries benefit from the support
that bandages can give.
 ■ To assess the casualty’s condition.
 ■ To comfort and reassure the casualty.
 ■ To maintain a casualty’s privacy and dignity.
 ■ To use a first aid technique relevant to the injury.
 ■ To use dressings and bandages as needed.
 ■ To apply good handling techniques if moving a
casualty.
 ■ To obtain appropriate help: call 911 for emergency
help if you suspect serious injury or illness.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
11
TECHNIQUES
AND EQUIPMENT
232
TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT
REMOVING CLOTHING
To make a thorough examination of a casualty,
obtain an accurate diagnosis, or give treatment,
you may have to remove some of his clothing.
This should be done with the minimum of
disturbance to the casualty and with his
agreement if possible. Remove as little clothing
as possible and do not damage clothing unless it
is necessary. If you need to cut a garment, try
to cut along the seams, keeping the clothing
clear of the casualty’s injury. Maintain the
casualty’s privacy and prevent exposure to
cold. Stop if removing clothing increases the
casualty’s discomfort or pain.
REMOVING CLOTHING IN LOWER BODY INJURIES
REMOVING CLOTHING IN UPPER BODY INJURIES
Shoes
Untie any laces, support the ankle,
and carefully pull the shoe off by
the heel. To remove long boots,
you may need to cut them down
the back seam.
Socks
Remove socks by pulling them off
gently. If this is not possible, lift
each sock away from the leg
and cut the fabric with a pair
of scissors.
Trousers
Gently pull up the pant leg
to expose the calf and knee or
pull down from the waist. If
you need to cut clothing, lift
it clear of the casualty’s injury.
Jackets
Support the injured arm. Undo any fastenings
on the jacket and gently pull the garment off
the casualty’s shoulders. Remove the arm on the
uninjured side from its sleeve. Pull the garment
around to the injured side of the body and ease
it off the injured arm.
Sweaters and sweatshirts
With clothing that cannot be unfastened, begin by
easing the arm on the uninjured side out of its sleeve.
Next, roll up the garment and stretch it over the
casualty’s head. Finally, slip off the other sleeve of
the garment, taking care not to disturb her arm
on the injured side.
233
REMOVING CLOTHING | REMOVING HEADGEAR
Protective headgear, such as a a horseback rider's, bicyclist’s, or
motorcyclist’s helmet, is best left on; it should be removed only
if absolutely necessary, for example, if you cannot maintain an
open airway. If the item does need to be removed, the casualty
should do this herself if possible; otherwise, you and a helper
should remove it. Support the head and neck at all times and
keep the head aligned with the spine.
SEE ALSO Spinal injury pp.157–59
Ask a helper to grip the
sides of the helmet and pull
them apart to take pressure off
the head, then lift the helmet
upward and backward.
Undo or cut the straps. Working from the base
of the helmet, ease your fingers underneath
the rim. Support the back of the neck with one
hand and hold the lower jaw firmly. Ask a helper to
hold the helmet with both hands.
Maintain support on the head and neck. Ask your helper to tilt
the helmet forward slightly so that it will pass over the base of the
casualty’s skull, and then to lift it straight off the casualty’s head.
Continue to support the casualty’s neck and
lower jaw. Ask your helper, working from
above, to tilt the helmet backward (without moving
the head) and gently lift the front of the helmet
clear of the casualty’s chin.
2
1
3
2
Do not remove a helmet unless
absolutely necessary.
REMOVING AN OPEN-FACE OR RIDING HELMET
REMOVING A FULL-FACE HELMET
Undo or cut through
the chinstrap. Support
the casualty’s head and neck,
keeping them aligned with
the spine. Hold the lower jaw
with one hand and support the
neck with the other hand.
1
REMOVING HEADGEAR
CAUTION
234
CASUALTY HANDLING
 ■ Do not approach a casualty
if doing so puts your own life
in danger.
 ■ Do not move a casualty unless
there is an emergency situation
that demands you take
immediate action.
When giving first aid you should leave a casualty in the position
in which you find him until medical help arrives. Only move him
if he is in imminent danger, and even then only if it is safe for you
to approach and you have the training and equipment to carry
out the move. A casualty should be moved quickly if he is in
imminent danger from:
 ■ Drowning (p.100);
 ■ Fire or he is in an area that is filling with smoke (pp.32–33);
 ■ Explosion or gunfire;
 ■ A collapsing building or other structure.
If it is necessary to move a casualty, consider
the following before you start.
 ■ Is the task necessary? Usually, the casualty
can be assessed and treated in the position in
which you find him.
 ■ What are his injuries or conditions, and will a
move make them worse?
 ■ Can the casualty move himself? Ask the
casualty if he feels able to move.
 ■ The weight and size of the casualty.
 ■ Can anyone help? If so, are you and any
helpers trained and physically fit?
 ■ Will you need protective equipment to
enter the area, and do you have it?
 ■ Is there any equipment available to assist
with moving the casualty and are you trained
to use it?
 ■ Is there enough space around the casualty
to move him safely?
 ■ What sort of ground will you be crossing?
If you need to move a casualty, take the
following steps to ensure safety.
 ■ Select a method relevant to the situation, the
casualty’s condition, and the help and
equipment that is available.
 ■ Use a team. Appoint one person to
coordinate the move and make sure that the
team understands exactly what to do.
 ■ Plan your move carefully and make sure that
everyone is prepared.
 ■ Prepare any equipment and make sure that
the team and equipment are in position.
 ■ Use the correct technique to avoid injuring
the casualty, yourself, or any helpers.
 ■ Ensure the safety and comfort of the casualty,
yourself, and any helpers.
 ■ Always explain to the casualty what is
happening, and encourage him to cooperate
as much as possible.
 ■ Position yourself as close as possible to the
casualty’s body.
 ■ Adopt a stable base, with your feet shoulderwidth apart, so that you remain well balanced
and maintain good posture at all times during
the procedure.
 ■ Use the strongest muscles in your legs and
arms to power the move. Bend your knees.
ASSESSING THE RISK OF MOVING A CASUALTY
ASSISTING A CASUALTY SAFELY
TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT
CAUTION
235
FIRST AID MATERIALS
All workplaces, leisure centers, homes, and
cars should have first aid kits. The kits for
workplaces or public places must conform to
legal requirements and be clearly marked and
easily accessible. For home or the car, you can
either buy a kit or put together first aid items
yourself and keep them in a clean, waterproof
container. Any first aid kit must be kept in a
dry place, and it should be checked and
replenished regularly.
The items shown on these pages form the
basis of a first aid kit for the home. You may
wish to add pain-relief tablets such as
acetaminophen or ibuprofen.
STERILE DRESSINGS
CASUALTY HANDLING | FIRST AID MATERIALS
Wound dressings
The most useful dressings
consist of a dressing pad
attached to a roller
bandage, and are sealed
in a protective wrapping.
They are easy to apply,
so they are ideal in an
emergency. Various sizes
are available. Individual
sterile dressing pads that
can be secured with tape
or bandages are also
available. Dressings with a
nonstick suface are useful.
Adhesive dressings
or bandages
These are applied to small cuts
and abrasions and are made of
fabric or waterproof plastic. Use
hypoallergenic bandages for
anyone who is allergic to the
adhesive in regular ones. Special
gel bandages can protect blisters.
STERILE EYE PAD
STERILE WOUND DRESSING STERILE GAUZE PAD
FABRIC BANDAGES WATERPROOF BANDAGES
CLEAR BANDAGES BLUE CATERING BANDAGES
NOVELTY BANDAGES FOR CHILDREN
GEL BLISTER BANDAGE
»
236
FIRST AID MATERIALS
PROTECTIVE ITEMS
BANDAGES
Rollers
These items are used to
give support to injured joints,
secure dressings in place, maintain
pressure on wounds, and
limit swelling.
Triangular bandages
Made of cloth, these items can be used folded
as bandages or slings. If they are sterile and
individually wrapped, they may also be used as
dressings for large wounds and burns.
Disposable gloves
Wear gloves, if available, whenever you dress wounds
or when you handle body fluids or other waste
materials. Use latex-free gloves because some people
are allergic to latex.
Gauze tubular bandages
Gauze tubular bandages are used with an applicator to
secure dressings on fingers and toes. Elasticated
tubular bandages are sometimes used to support
injured joints such as the knee or elbow.
Protection from infection in CPR
You can use a plastic face shield or a pocket mask to
protect you and the casualty from cross infections
when giving rescue breaths.
TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT
FACE SHIELD POCKET MASK
GAUZE TUBULAR BANDAGE AND APPLICATOR
CONFORMING ELASTIC ROLLER
ELASTIC ROLLER
GAUZE WRAP
ROLLER
SELF-ADHESIVE
ROLLER
FOLDED TRIANGULAR BANDAGE
«
237
BASIC MATERIALS FOR A GENERAL FIRST AID KIT
ADDITIONAL ITEMS
FIRST AID MATERIALS
Cleansing wipes
Alcohol-free wipes can be used to
clean skin around wounds.
Useful items
Plastic wrap or clean plastic bags can be used to dress
burns and scalds. Nonstick dressings can be kept for
larger wounds. Keep alcohol gel to clean your hands
when no water is available.
Scissors, shears, and tweezers
Choose items that are blunt-ended so that they will
not cause injuries. Use shears to cut clothing.
Pins and clips
Use these to secure the ends of bandages.
Gauze pads
Use these pads as dressings, as
padding, or as swabs to clean
around wounds.
Adhesive tape
Use tape to secure dressings
or the loose ends of bandages. If
the casualty is allergic to the
adhesive on the tape, use a
hypoallergenic tape.
For use outdoors
A blanket can protect a casualty from cold. Survival
bags are very compact and will keep a person warm
and dry in an emergency. A flashlight helps visibility,
and a whistle can be used to summon help.
 ■ Easily identifiable watertight box
 ■ 20 adhesive bandages in
assorted sizes
 ■ Six medium sterile dressings
 ■ Two large sterile dressings
 ■ One sterile eye pad
 ■ Six triangular bandages
 ■ Six safety pins
 ■ Disposable gloves
 ■ Two roller bandages
 ■ Scissors
 ■ Tweezers
 ■ Alcohol-free wound cleansing wipes
 ■ Adhesive tape
 ■ Plastic face shield or pocket mask
 ■ Notepad and pencil
 ■ Alcohol gel (hand sanitizer)
Other useful items:
 ■ Blanket, survival bag,
flashlight, whistle
 ■ Flares, warning triangles, and high
visibility jacket to keep in the car
238
DRESSINGS
Always cover a wound with a dressing because
this helps prevent infection. With severe
bleeding, pressure dressings are used to help
the blood-clotting process by exerting pressure
on the wound.
Use a prepacked sterile wound dressing with a
bandage attached (opposite) whenever possible.
If no such dressing is available, use a sterile pad.
Alternatively, any clean, nonfluffy material can be
used to improvize a dressing (p.240). Protect
small cuts with an adhesive dressing (p.241).
When handling or applying a dressing, there
are a number of rules to follow. These enable
you to apply dressings correctly; they also
protect the casualty and yourself from
cross infection.
 ■ Always put on disposable gloves, if they are
available, before handling any dressing.
 ■ Cover the wound with a dressing that extends
beyond the wound’s edges.
 ■ Hold the edge of the dressing, keeping your
fingers well away from the area that will be in
contact with the wound.
 ■ Place the dressing directly on top of the
wound; do not slide it on from the side.
 ■ Remove and replace any dressing that slips
out of position.
 ■ If you only have one sterile dressing,
use this to cover the wound, and put other
clean materials on top of it.
 ■ If blood seeps through the dressing,
do not remove it; instead, place another
dressing over the top. If blood seeps through
the second dressing, remove both dressings
completely and then apply a fresh dressing,
making sure that you put pressure on the
bleeding point.
 ■ After treating a wound, dispose of gloves,
used dressings, and soiled items in a suitable
plastic bag, such as a red biohazard bag. Keep
disposable gloves on until you have finished
handling any materials that may be
contaminated, then put them in the bag.
RULES FOR USING DRESSINGS
TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT
WEAR DISPOSABLE GLOVES USE DRESSING LARGER THAN WOUND DISPOSE OF WASTE
SEE ALSO Cuts and scrapes p.119 | First aid materials pp.235–37 | Severe external bleeding pp.114–15
239
HOW TO APPLY A STERILE WOUND DRESSING
DRESSINGS
 ■ If the dressing slips out of
place, remove it and apply
a new dressing.
 ■ Take care not to impair
the circulation beyond the
dressing (p.243).
WHAT TO DO
Break the seal and remove the wrapping.
Unwind some of the bandage, taking care not
to drop the roll or touch the dressing pad.
Wind the other end (head) of the bandage
around the limb to cover the whole pad. Leave
the short end of the bandage hanging free.
To secure the bandage, tie the ends in a square
knot (p.250), directly over the pad to maintain
firm pressure on the wound.
Once you have secured the bandage, check
the circulation in the limb beyond it (p.243).
Loosen the bandage if it is too tight, then reapply.
Recheck every ten minutes.
Unfold the dressing pad, and lay it directly on
the wound. Hold the bandage on each side of
the pad as you place it over the wound.
Wind the short end of the bandage once
around the limb and the pad to secure
the dressing.
4
5
6
2
1
3
This type of dressing consists of a dressing pad attached to
a elastic bandage. The pad is a piece of gauze backed by a layer
of cotton wool or padding.
Sterile dressings are available individually wrapped in various
sizes. They are sealed in protective wrappings to keep them
sterile. Once the seal on this type of dressing has been broken,
the dressing is no longer sterile.
»
CAUTION
240
TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT
DRESSINGS
If there is no sterile wound dressing with a bandage available,
use a sterile pad or make a pad with pieces of gauze. Make sure
the pad is large enough to extend well beyond the edges of the
wound. Hold the dressing face down; never touch the part of
the dressing that will be in contact with a wound. Secure the
dressing with tape. If you need to maintain pressure to control
bleeding, use a bandage.
If you have no suitable dressings, any
clean nonfluffy material can be used in an
emergency. If using a piece of folded cloth,
hold it by its edges, unfold it, then refold it so
that the clean inner side can be placed against
the wound.
IMPROVISED DRESSINGS
STERILE PAD AND GAUZE DRESSINGS
WHAT TO DO
WHAT TO DO
 ■ Never apply adhesive tape
all the way around a limb
or digit because this can
impair circulation.
 ■ Check that the casualty is not
allergic to the adhesive before
using adhesive tape; if there
is any allergy, use a pad
and bandage.
Secure the pad with a
bandage or a clean strip of
cloth, such as a scarf. Tie the
ends in a square knot (p.250).
Place the cloth pad
directly on the wound.
If necessary, cover the pad
with more material.
Secure the pad with adhesive tape or a
roller bandage.
Hold the material by the
edges. Open it out and
refold it so that the inner surface
faces outward.
Holding the dressing or pad by the edges,
place it directly onto the wound.
2 3
2
1
1
«
CAUTION
SEE ALSO Roller bandages pp.244–47
241
DRESSINGS | COLD COMPRESSES
These are useful for dressing small cuts and scrapes. They consist
of a gauze or cellulose pad and an adhesive backing, and are often
wrapped singly in sterile packs. There are several sizes available,
and special shapes for use on fingertips, heels, and elbows; some
types are waterproof. Blister bandages have an oval cushioned pad.
People who work with food must cover any wounds with
waterproof adhesive bandages.
Cooling an injury such as a bruise or sprain can reduce swelling
and pain. There are two types of compress: cold pads, which
are made from material dampened with cold water, and ice packs.
An ice pack can be made using crushed ice and a small amount
of water sealed in a plastic bag, or packages of frozen peas or
other small vegetables.
ADHESIVE BANDAGES
WHAT TO DO
Clean and dry the skin around the wound. Unwrap the adhesive
bandage and hold it by the protective strips over the backing,
with the pad side facing downward.
Peel back the strips to
expose the pad, but do not
remove them. Without touching
the pad surface, place the pad on
the wound.
Soak a clean washcloth
or towel in cold water. Wring
it out lightly and fold it into a
pad. Hold it firmly against the
injury (right).
Partly fill a plastic bag with
crushed ice, or use a pack of
frozen vegetables. Wrap the bag
in a dry cloth.
Carefully pull away the
protective strips, then press
down the edges of the bandage.
Resoak the pad in cold
water every few minutes to
keep it cold. Cool the injury for
at least ten minutes.
Hold the pack firmly on the
area (left). Cool the injury
for no more than ten minutes at
a time, removing the pack for
five-minute periods.
1
3
2
2
1
2
1
 ■ Check that the casualty
is not allergic to the adhesive
dressings. If he is, use
hypoallergenic tape or a pad
and bandage.
 ■ To prevent cold injuries, always
wrap an ice pack in a cloth. Do
not leave it on the skin for more
than ten minutes at a time.
COLD PAD ICE PACK
USING A COLD COMPRESS
COLD COMPRESSES
CAUTION
CAUTION
242
TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT
PRINCIPLES OF BANDAGING
There are a number of different first aid uses
for bandages: they can be used to secure
dressings, control bleeding, support and
immobilize limbs, and reduce swelling in an
injured limb. There are three main types of
bandages. Roller bandages secure dressings and
support injured limbs. Tubular bandages hold
dressings on fingers or toes, or support injured
joints. Triangular bandages can be used as large
dressings, as slings, to secure dressings, or to
immobilize limbs. If you have no bandage
available, you can improvise from everyday
items; for example, you can fold a square of
fabric, such as a headscarf, diagonally to make
a triangular bandage (p.249).
 ■ Reassure the casualty before applying a
bandage and explain clearly what you are
going to do.
 ■ Help the casualty sit or lie down in a
comfortable position.
 ■ Support the injured part of the body while
you are working on it. Ask the casualty or a
helper to do this.
 ■ Work from the front of the casualty, and from
the injured side where possible.
 ■ Pass the bandages through the body’s natural
hollows at the ankles, knees, waist, and neck,
then slide them into position by easing them
back and forth under the body.
 ■ Apply bandages firmly, but not so tightly that
they interfere with circulation to the area
beyond the bandage (opposite).
 ■ Fingers or toes should be left exposed,
if possible, so that you can check the
circulation afterward.
 ■ Use square knots to tie bandages (p.250).
Ensure that the knots do not cause
discomfort, and do not tie the knot over a
bony area. Tuck loose ends under a knot
if possible, to provide additional padding.
 ■ Check the circulation in the area beyond the
bandage (opposite) every ten minutes once it
is secured. If necessary, unroll the bandage
until the blood supply returns, and reapply it
more loosely.
RULES FOR APPLYING A BANDAGE
SEE ALSO Roller bandages pp.244–47 | Triangular bandages p.249 | Tubular gauze bandages p.248
243
PRINCIPLES OF BANDAGING
If circulation is impaired there
may be:
 ■ A swollen and congested limb
 ■ Blue skin with prominent veins
 ■ A feeling that the skin is
painfully distended.
Later there may be:
 ■ Pale, waxy skin
 ■ Skin cold to touch
 ■ Numbness and tingling followed
by severe pain
 ■ Inability to move affected fingers
or toes.
RECOGNITION
When applying bandages to immobilize
a limb you also need to use soft, bulky material,
such as towels or clothing, as padding. Place the
padding between the legs, or between an arm
and the body, so that the bandaging does not
displace broken bones or press bony areas
against each other. Use folded triangular
bandages and tie them at intervals along the
limb, avoiding the injury site. Secure with
square knots (p.250) tied on the uninjured side.
If both sides of the body are injured, tie knots in
the middle or where there is least chance of
causing further damage.
When bandaging a limb or applying a sling, you must check
the circulation in the hand or foot immediately after you have
finished bandaging, and every ten minutes thereafter. These
checks are essential because limbs can swell after an injury, and
a bandage can rapidly become too tight and restrict blood
circulation to the area beyond it. If this occurs, you need to
undo the bandage and reapply it more loosely.
IMMOBILIZING A LIMB
CHECKING CIRCULATION AFTER BANDAGING
TIE KNOTS ON THE UNINJURED SIDE, NEVER OVER JOINT
OR FRACTURE
Press one of the nails or the
skin beyond the bandage,
for five seconds until it turns
pale, then release the pressure.
If the color does not return
within two seconds, the
bandage is too tight.
Loosen a tight bandage
by unrolling enough turns
for warmth and color to return
to the skin. The casualty may feel
a tingling sensation. If necessary,
loosen and reapply the bandage.
Recheck every ten minutes.
1 2
WHAT TO DO
244
TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT
ROLLER BANDAGES
These bandages are made of cotton, gauze,
elastic fabric, or linen and are wrapped around
the injured part of the body in spiral turns.
There are three main types of roller bandage.
 ■ Open-weave bandages, often made of gauze,
are used to hold dressings in place. Their
loose weave allows good ventilation, but they
cannot be used to exert direct pressure on the
wound to control bleeding or to provide
support to joints.
 ■ Self-adhesive support bandages are used to
support muscle (and joint) injuries and do not
need pins or clips.
 ■ Elastic bandages are used to give firm, even
support to injured joints.
There are several ways to fasten the end
of a roller bandage. Safety pins or adhesive tape
are usually included in first aid kits. Some
bandage packs may contain bandage clips. If
you do not have any of these, a simple tuck
should keep the bandage end in place.
Before applying a roller bandage, check that it
is tightly rolled and of a suitable width for the
injured area. Small areas such as fingers require
narrow bandages of approximately 1 in (2.5 cm)
wide, while wider bandages of 4–6 in (10–15 cm)
are more suitable for large areas such as legs. It
is better for a roller bandage to be too wide
than too narrow. Smaller sizes may be needed
for a child.
SECURING ROLLER BANDAGES
CHOOSING THE CORRECT SIZE OF BANDAGE
Adhesive tape
The ends of bandages can be
folded under and then stuck down
with small strips of adhesive tape.
Safety pin
These pins can secure all types
of roller bandage. Fold the end
of the bandage under, then put
your finger under the bandage
to prevent injury as you insert
the pin (right). Make sure that,
once fastened, the pin lies
flat (far right).
Bandage clip
Metal clips are sometimes supplied
with elastic roller bandages for
securing the ends.
Tucking in the end
If you have no fastening, secure the
bandage by passing the end around
the limb once and tucking it in.
245
ROLLER BANDAGES
Follow the general rules below when applying a roller bandage
to an injury.
 ■ Keep the rolled part of the bandage (the “head”) uppermost as
you work. (The unrolled short end is called the “tail.”)
 ■ Position yourself in front of the casualty, on the injured side.
 ■ Support the injured part while you apply the bandage.
APPLYING A ROLLER BANDAGE
WHAT TO DO
Place the tail of the bandage below the injury.
Working from the inside of the limb outward,
make two straight turns with the bandage to
anchor the tail in place.
Finish with one straight turn. If the bandage is
too short, apply another one in the same way
so that the injured area is covered.
Secure the end of the bandage, then check
the circulation beyond the bandage (p.243).
If necessary, unroll the bandage until the blood
supply returns, and reapply it more loosely.
Recheck every ten minutes.
Wind the bandage in spiraling turns working
from the inner to the outer side of the limb,
and work up the limb. Cover one half to two-thirds
of the previous layer of bandage with each
new turn.
3
2 4
1
 ■ Once you have applied the
bandage, check the circulation
in the limb beyond it (p.243).
This is especially important if
you are applying an elastic
bandage because these mold
to the shape of the limb and
therefore may become tighter
if the limb swells.
»
CAUTION
246
TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT
ROLLER BANDAGES
ELBOW AND KNEE BANDAGES
WHAT TO DO
Pass the bandage to the
inner side of the limb, just
above the joint. Make a turn
around the limb, covering the
upper half of the bandage from
the first turn.
To finish bandaging the
joint, make two straight
turns around the limb, then
secure the end of the bandage
(p.244). Check the circulation
beyond the bandage as soon as
you have finished, then recheck
every ten minutes (p.243). If
necessary, unroll the bandage
and reapply more loosely.
Support the injured limb in
a comfortable position for
the casualty, with the joint
partially flexed. Place the tail of
the bandage on the inner side of
the joint. Pass the bandage over
and around to the outside of the
joint. Make one-and-a-half turns,
so that the tail end of the bandage
is fixed and the joint is covered.
Continue to bandage
diagonally above and below
the joint in a figure-eight.
Increase the bandaged area by
covering about two-thirds of
the previous turn with each
new layer.
Pass the bandage from the
inner side of the upper limb
to just below the joint. Make one
diagonal turn below the elbow
joint to cover the lower half of
the bandaging from the first
straight turn.
2
5
1
3 4
 ■ Do not apply the bandage so
tightly that the circulation to
the limb beyond is impaired.
Roller bandages can be used on elbows and knees to support soft
tissue injuries such as strains or sprains. To ensure that there is
effective support, flex the joint slightly, then apply the bandage in
figure-eight turns rather than the standard spiraling turns (p.245).
Work from the inside to the outside of the upper surface of the
joint. Extend the bandaging far enough on either side of the joint to
exert an even pressure.
«
CAUTION
247
ROLLER BANDAGES
A elastic bandage may be applied to hold
dressings in place on a hand, or to support a
wrist in soft tissue injuries. A support bandage
should extend well beyond the injury
site to provide pressure over the entire
injured area.
HAND BANDAGES
WHAT TO DO
Repeat the sequence of figure-eight turns.
Extend the bandaging by covering about
two-thirds of the bandage from the previous turn
with each new layer. When the hand is completely
covered, finish with two straight turns around
the wrist.
Secure the end (p.244). As soon as you have
finished, check the circulation beyond the
bandage (p.243), then recheck every ten minutes.
If necessary, unroll the bandage until the blood
supply returns and reapply it more loosely.
Pass the bandage diagonally
across the back of the hand
to the outer side of the wrist.
Take the bandage under the
wrist. Then repeat the diagonal
over the back of the hand.
Working from the inner side
of the wrist, pass the
bandage diagonally across the
back of the hand to the nail of
the little finger, and across the
front of the casualty’s fingers.
Place the tail of the bandage
on the inner side of the
wrist, by the base of the thumb.
Make two straight turns around
the wrist.
1 2 3
4
5
248
TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT
TUBULAR GAUZE BANDAGES
These bandages are rolls of seamless, tubular fabric.
The tubular gauze bandage is used with a special applicator,
which is supplied with the bandage. It is suitable for holding
dressings in place on a finger or toe, but not to control bleeding.
4
1 3
2
Cut a piece of tubular gauze about two-and-ahalf times the length of the injured finger. Push
the whole length of the tubular gauze onto the
applicator, then gently slide the applicator over the
casualty’s finger.
While still holding the gauze at the base of the
finger, gently push the applicator back over the
finger to apply a second layer of gauze. Once the
gauze has been applied, remove the applicator
from the finger.
Holding the end of the gauze on the finger,
pull the applicator slightly beyond the fingertip
to leave a gauze layer on the finger. Twist the
applicator twice to seal the bandage over the end
of the finger.
Secure the gauze at the base of the finger with
adhesive tape. Check the circulation
to the finger immediately (p.243) and then again
every ten minutes. Ask the casualty if the finger
feels cold or tingly. If it does, remove the gauze and
reapply it more loosely.
 ■ Do not encircle the finger
completely with tape because
this may impair circulation.
APPLYING A TUBULAR GAUZE
CAUTION
249
TUBULAR GAUZE BANDAGES | TRIANGULAR BANDAGES
This type of bandage may be supplied in a
sterile pack as part of a first aid kit. You can also
make one by cutting or folding a square yard of
sturdy fabric diagonally in half. The bandage can
be used in the following three ways.
 ■ Folded as a broad-fold bandage or narrowfold bandage (right) to immobilize and
support a limb or to secure a splint or bulky
dressing.
 ■ Opened to form a sling, or to hold a hand,
foot, or scalp dressing in place.
 ■ From a sterile pack, folded into a pad
and used as a sterile dressing.
Keep triangular bandages
in their packs so that they
remain sterile until you need
them. Alternatively, fold them
as shown (right) so that they
are ready for use as a pad or
bandage, or can be shaken open.
STORING A TRIANGULAR BANDAGE
MAKING A BROAD-FOLD
BANDAGE
MAKING A NARROW-FOLD
BANDAGE
Open out a triangular bandage and lay it
flat on a clean surface. Fold the bandage
in half horizontally, so that the point of the triangle
touches the center of the base.
Start by folding the triangle
into a narrow-fold bandage
(above). Bring the two ends of
the bandage into the center.
Fold a triangular bandage to make a broad-fold
bandage (above).
Continue folding the ends
into the center until the
bandage is a convenient size for
storing. Keep the bandage in a
dry place.
Fold the bandage in half again in the same
direction, so that the first folded edge
touches the base. The bandage should now form
a broad strip.
Fold the bandage horizontally in half again.
It should form a long, narrow, thick strip
of material.
2
2
1
1
1
2
Point
End
OPEN TRIANGULAR BANDAGE Base
TRIANGULAR BANDAGES
250
TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT
SQUARE KNOTS
HAND AND FOOT COVER
When securing a triangular bandage, always
use a square knot. It is secure and will not slip, it
is easy to untie, and it lies flat, so it is more
comfortable for the casualty. Avoid tying the
knot around or directly over the injury, since
this may cause discomfort.
Pass the left end of
the bandage (dark)
over and under the
right end (light).
Lift both ends
of the bandage
above the rest of
the material.
Lay the bandage
flat. Place the
casualty’s hand on the
bandage, fingers
toward the point.
Fold the point over
the hand.
Pass the end in
your right hand
(dark) over and under
the left end (light).
Cross the ends
over the hand, and
pass around the wrist
in opposite directions.
Tie the ends in a square
knot (above).
Pull the ends to
tighten the knot,
then tuck them under
the bandage.
Pull the point
gently to tighten
the bandage. Fold the
point up over the knot
and tuck it in.
1 2
1
3
2
4
3
TYING AND UNTYING A SQUARE KNOT
Untying a square knot
Pull one end and one piece of bandage
from the same side of the knot firmly so
that the piece of bandage straightens.
Hold the knot and pull the straightened
end through it.
An open triangular
bandage can be used
to hold a dressing in
place on a hand or
foot, but it will not
provide enough
pressure to control
bleeding. The method
for covering a hand
(right) can also be
used for a foot, with
the bandage ends tied
at the ankle.
SQUARE KNOTS | HAND AND FOOT COVER | ARM SLING
251
ARM SLING
WHAT TO DO
Ensure that the injured arm
is supported with the hand
slightly higher than the elbow.
Fold the base of the bandage
under to form a hem. Place the
bandage with the base parallel
to the casualty’s body and level
with his little fingernail. Slide the
upper end under the injured arm
and pull it around the neck to
the opposite shoulder.
Tie a square knot (opposite)
on the injured side, at the
hollow above the casualty’s
collarbone. Tuck both free ends
of the bandage under the knot
to pad it. Adjust the sling so that
the front edge supports the
hand—it should extend to the
top of the casualty’s little finger.
Fold the lower end of
the bandage up over the
forearm and bring it to meet the
upper end at the shoulder.
Hold the point of the
bandage beyond the elbow
and twist it until the fabric fits
the elbow snugly, then tuck it in
or knot it. Alternatively, if you
have a safety pin, fold the fabric
and fasten it to the front.
Bind the finished sling to
the body with another
triangular bandage or swathe.
As soon as you have finished,
check the circulation in the
fingers (p.243). Recheck every
ten minutes. If necessary,
loosen and reapply the
bandages and sling.
1
3
2
4 5
An arm sling holds the forearm in a slightly
raised or horizontal position. It provides support
for an injured upper arm, wrist, or forearm,
on a casualty whose elbow can be bent, or to
immobilize the arm for a rib fracture (p.154).
An elevation sling (p.252) is used to keep the
forearm and hand raised in a higher position.
252
TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT
ELEVATION SLING
This form of sling supports the forearm and
hand in a raised position, with the fingertips
touching the casualty’s shoulder. In this way, an
elevation sling helps control bleeding from
wounds in the forearm or hand, to minimize
swelling. An elevation sling is also used to
support the arm in the case of an injured hand.
WHAT TO DO
Ask the casualty to support
his injured arm across his
chest, with the fingers resting on
the opposite shoulder.
Bring the lower end of
the bandage up diagonally
across his back, to meet the
other end at his shoulder.
Place the bandage over his
body, with one end over the
shoulder on the uninjured side.
Hold the point just beyond
his elbow.
Tie the ends in a square knot
(p.250) at the hollow above
the casualty’s collarbone. Tuck
ends under the knot to pad it.
Ask the casualty to let go
of his injured arm while
you tuck the base of the
bandage under his hand,
forearm, and elbow.
Twist the point until
the bandage fits closely
around the casualty’s elbow.
Tuck the point in just above his
elbow to secure it. If you have
a safety pin, fold the fabric
over the elbow and fasten the
point at the corner. Check the
circulation in the thumb every
ten minutes (p.243); loosen and
reapply if necessary.
1
4
2
5
3
6
253
ELEVATION SLING | IMPROVISED SLINGS
IMPROVISED SLINGS
If you suspect that the forearm
is broken, use a cloth sling or
a jacket corner to provide
support. Do not use any other
improvised sling: it will not
provide enough support.
If you need to support a casualty’s injured arm but do not
have a triangular bandage available, you can make a sling by
using a square yard (just under one square meter) of any
strong cloth (p.249). You can also improvise by using an
item of the casualty’s clothing (below). Check circulation after
applying support (p.243) and recheck every ten minutes.
Jacket corner
Undo the casualty’s
jacket. Fold the lower
edge on the injured side
up over his arm. Secure
the corner of the hem to
the jacket breast with a
large safety pin. Tuck and
pin the excess material
closely around the elbow.
Button-up jacket
Undo one button of
a jacket or coat (or
waistcoat). Place
the hand of the injured
arm inside the garment
at the gap formed by
the unfastened button.
Advise the casualty
to rest his wrist on the
button just beneath
the gap.
Belt or thin garment
Use a belt, a tie, a pair
of suspenders, or panty
hose to make a “collarand-cuff” support.
Fasten the item to form
a loop. Place it over the
casualty’s head, then
twist it once to form a
smaller loop at the front.
Place the casualty’s hand
into the loop.
Long-sleeved shirt
Lay the injured arm
across the casualty’s
chest. Pin the cuff of the
sleeve to the breast of
the shirt. To improvise
an elevation sling
(opposite), pin the sleeve
at the casualty’s opposite
shoulder, to keep her
arm raised.
CAUTION
This chapter is designed as a user-friendly
quick-reference guide to first aid
treatment for casualties with serious
illnesses or injuries, but it is not a substitute
for certified CPR and first aid training. It
begins with an action plan to help identify
first aid priorities, using the primary survey
(pp.44–45) followed by the secondary
survey (pp.46–48) where appropriate.
The chapter goes on to show how
to treat unconscious casualties, whose
care always takes priority over that of less
seriously injured casualties. In addition,
there is step-by-step essential first aid for
potentially life-threatening illnesses and
injuries that benefit from immediate first
aid. These include asthma, stroke, severe
bleeding, shock, heart attack, burns, broken
bones, and spinal injuries. Each condition
is described in more detail in the main part
of the book and cross-referenced here
so it can easily be found if you need
further advice.
 ■ To protect yourself from danger and make the
area safe.
 ■ To assess the situation quickly and calmly and
summon appropriate help.
 ■ To assist casualties and provide necessary treatment
with the help of bystanders.
 ■ To call 911 for emergency help if you suspect a
serious illness or injury.
 ■ To be aware of your own needs.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
12
EMERGENCY
FIRST AID
256
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
ACTION IN AN EMERGENCY
UNCONSCIOUS
CASUALTY
CONTINUE CPR/CHEST
COMPRESSIONS (see left)
Assess the casualty using the primary survey
(pp.44–45). Identify life-threatening conditions
and once these are managed, carry out a
secondary survey (pp.46–48).
CIRCULATION
Check for and treat life-threatening conditions,
such as severe bleeding.
CIRCULATION
Check for and treat life-threatening
conditions, such as severe bleeding.
Call 911 for emergency help.
Maintain an open airway. Place
the casualty on his side in the
recovery position.
DANGER
Make sure the area is safe before you
approach. Is anyone in danger?
RESPONSE
Is the casualty conscious?
Try to get a response by asking
questions and gently shaking
his shoulders.
Is there a response?
START
NO
NO
YES
YES
NO
NO
YES
YES
ASSESS FOR BREATHING
Is the casualty breathing normally (not just
gasping)?
CPR/CHEST
COMPRESSIONS
Ask someone to call 911
for emergency help and
get an AED if possible.
Begin cardiopulmonary
resuscitation/CPR with
chest compressions (adult
p.258, child p.260, infant
p.260), alternating chest
compressions with
rescue breaths.
ASSESS FOR BREATHING
Has the casualty resumed breathing?
COMPRESSION-ONLY CPR
SINGLE RESCUER
Give chest compressions only if you have not had
formal training in CPR or you are unwilling or
unable to give rescue breaths. The 911 dispatcher
will give instructions for compression-only CPR.
If you are alone, call 911 for emergency
help, then commence CPR (adult
p.258). If the casualty is a child or an
infant, give chest compressions and
rescue breaths (CPR) for two minutes
(child p.260, infant p.260). Call 911 for
emergency help, then continue CPR.
257
ACTION IN AN EMERGENCY
CONSCIOUS
CASUALTY
If it is not safe, do not approach.
Call 911 for emergency help.
AIRWAY AND
BREATHING
If a person is conscious
and alert, it follows
that her airway is open
and clear. Breathing may
be fast, slow, easy, or
difficult. Assess and treat
any difficulty found.
CIRCULATION
Are there life-threatening conditions, such as
severe bleeding or heart attack?
CARRY OUT A SECONDARY SURVEY
Assess the level of consciousness using the
AVPU scale (p.52) and carry out a head-to-toe
survey to check for signs of illness or injury.
Call for appropriate help. Call 911 for emergency help
if you suspect serious injury or illness. Monitor and
record casualty’s level of response, breathing, and pulse
while you wait for help to arrive.
TREAT LIFE-THREATENING
INJURIES OR ILLNESS.
Call 911 for emergency help. Monitor
and record casualty’s level of response,
breathing, and pulse while you wait for
help to arrive.
A–Z OF EMERGENCIES
NO
YES
Anaphylactic shock p.268
Asthma p.268
Broken bones p.274
Burns and scalds p.274
Choking adult p.264
Choking child p.264
Choking infant p.266
Head injury p.272
Heart attack p.262
Hypoglycemia p.278
Hypothermia pp.186-88
Meningitis p.266
Seizures in adults p.276
Seizures in children p.276
Severe external bleeding p.270
Shock p.270
Spinal injury p.272
Stroke p.262
Swallowed poisons p.278
258
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
CPR FOR AN ADULT
CHEST-COMPRESSION-ONLY CPR
Place one hand on the center
of the casualty’s chest. Place the
heel of your other hand on top of
the first and interlock your fingers,
but keep your fingers off the
casualty’s ribs.
Check for a response. Gently
shake the casualty’s shoulders,
and talk to him. Assess breathing;
if casualty is not breathing or only
gasping, go to the next step.
Lean directly over the casualty’s
chest and press down vertically
at least 2 in (5 cm). Release the
pressure, but do not remove your
hands. Give 30 compressions at a
rate of at least 100 per minute.
Kneel level with the casualty's
chest. Put one hand on the center
of the chest and the heel of your
other hand on top; interlock your
fingers. Depress chest at least 2 in
(5 cm), and release but keep your
hands in place. Do compressions
at a rate of 100 per minute.
Pinch the casualty’s nose firmly
to close the nostrils, and allow his
mouth to fall open. Take a breath
and seal your lips over the
casualty’s mouth. Blow steadily
into the mouth until the chest
rises—this should take about
one second.
Give chest compressions until
emergency help arrives; the
casualty shows signs of regaining
consciousness, such as coughing,
opening his eyes, speaking, or
moving purposefully, and starts to
breathe normally; or you are too
exhausted to continue.
POSITION HANDS
ON CHEST
CHECK FOR
RESPONSE
GIVE 30 CHEST
COMPRESSIONS
BEGIN CHEST
COMPRESSIONS
BEGIN RESCUE
BREATHS
CONTINUE CHEST
COMPRESSIONS
3
2 3
21
1
259
 ■ Chest-compression-only CPR is
given only if you have not had
formal training in CPR, or you
are unwilling or unable to give
rescue breaths. The dispatcher
will give you instructions for
chest-compression-only CPR.
 ■ Ensure that 911 has been called.
 ■ Use an AED as soon as possible,
attaching the pads and
following the instructions.
 ■ Do not delay chest
compressions until an AED
becomes available.
 ■ If there is more than one
rescuer, change over every
2 minutes, with minimal
interruption to chest
compressions.
Maintaining head tilt and chin lift,
take your mouth away from the
casualty’s. Look along the chest
and watch it fall. Repeat to give
TWO rescue breaths. Repeat 30
chest compressions followed by
TWO rescue breaths.
Continue CPR until emergency
help arrives, the casualty starts to
breathe normally, or you are too
exhausted to continue. If you are
unwilling or unable to give rescue
breaths, you can give chest
compressions alone (below).
WATCH CHEST
FALL
CONTINUE CPR
FIND OUT MORE pp.66–69, pp.84–85
FIND OUT MORE pp.70–71, pp.84–85
4 5
CPR FOR AN ADULT | CHEST-COMPRESSION-ONLY CPR
CAUTION
 ■ Ensure that 911 has been called.
 ■ Obtain and use an AED as soon
as possible, attaching the pads
and following the instructions.
 ■ Do not delay chest
compressions until an AED
becomes available.
 ■ If the casualty vomits during
CPR, roll him away from you
onto his side, ensuring that his
head is turned toward the floor
to allow vomit to drain. Clear
his mouth, then immediately
roll him onto his back again and
recommence CPR.
CAUTION
260
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
CPR FOR A CHILD ONE YEAR TO PUBERTY
CPR FOR AN INFANT UNDER ONE YEAR
Place the heel of one hand on the
center of her chest, but keep your
fingers off her ribs.
Lean directly over the child’s
chest and press down vertically
to about one third of its depth.
Release the pressure, but do not
remove your hands. Give 30
compressions at a rate of at least
100 per minute.
Pinch the nose firmly to close the
nostrils. Take a breath and seal
your lips over the child’s mouth.
Blow steadily into the mouth until
the chest rises—this should take
about one second.
Lean directly over the infant’s
chest and press down vertically
to about one third of its depth—
about 1½ in (4 cm). Release the
pressure but do not remove your
fingers. Give 30 compressions at
a rate of at least 100 per minute.
POSITION ONE
HAND ON CHEST
CHECK THAT
AIRWAY IS OPEN
GIVE 30 CHEST
COMPRESSIONS
POSITION TWO
FINGERS ON
CHEST
GIVE TWO
RESCUE BREATHS
CHECK THAT
AIRWAY IS OPEN
3
3
2
2
1
1
Place the infant on his back on
a flat surface, at waist height
in front of you or on the floor,
with a rolled-up towel under
his shoulders.
Open the airway by putting one
hand on the infant's forehead
and a fingertip of the other hand
under the tip of his chin, and
tilting up and back as shown. Pick
out any visible obstructions from
mouth and nose.
261
 ■ Use an AED, preferably with
pediatric pads, as soon as it
is available.
 ■ If you have not had formal
training in CPR or you are
unwilling or unable to give
rescue breaths, you can give
chest compressions only. The
dispatcher will give instructions
for chest-compression-only CPR.
 ■ If the infant vomits during CPR,
roll him away from you onto
his side, ensuring that his head
is turned toward the floor to
allow vomit to drain. Clear his
mouth, then restart CPR as
soon as possible.
Take a breath, and place your lips
over the infant’s mouth and nose,
making sure you get a good seal.
Blow steadily until the chest rises.
Give TWO rescue breaths. Call 911
for emergency help if this has not
already been done and obtain an
AED if available.
Maintaining head tilt and chin lift,
take your mouth away from the
casualty’s. Look along the chest
and watch it fall. Repeat to give
TWO rescue breaths. Repeat 30
chest compressions followed by
TWO rescue breaths.
Do CPR for two minutes, then call
911 for emergency help. Continue
CPR until emergency help arrives,
the child starts to breathe
normally, or you are too exhausted
to continue. If you are unwilling or
unable to give rescue breaths, you
can give chest compressions alone.
Continue CPR, alternating 30
compressions with TWO rescue
breaths until emergency help
takes over, the infant starts to
breathe, or you are too exhausted
to continue. If you are unwilling or
unable to give rescue breaths, give
chest compressions only.
GIVE TWO
RESCUE BREATHS
WATCH CHEST
FALL
CONTINUE CPR
CONTINUE CPR
FIND OUT MORE pp.76–79
FIND OUT MORE pp.82–83
4 5
54
CPR FOR A CHILD | CPR FOR AN INFANT
CAUTION
 ■ Use an AED, preferably with
pediatric pads, as soon as it is
available.
 ■ If the child is large or the
rescuer is small, give
compressions using both hands,
as for an adult (pp.258–59).
Place one hand on the child's
chest, cover it with your other
hand, and interlock your fingers.
 ■ If there is more than one
rescuer, change over every
2 minutes, with minimal
interruption to chest
compressions.
CAUTION
262
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
HEART ATTACK
STROKE
Help the casualty into a halfsitting position. Support his head
and shoulders and place cushions
under his knees. Reassure
the casualty.
Keep the casualty comfortable.
Ask him to smile. If he has had
a stroke, he may only be able to
smile on one side—the other side
of his face may droop.
Call 911 for emergency help. Tell
the dispatcher that you suspect
a heart attack. Call the casualty’s
doctor as well, if he asks you
to do so.
Ask the casualty to raise his
arms. If he has had a stroke,
he may be able to lift only
one arm.
MAKE CASUALTY
COMFORTABLE
CHECK
CASUALTY’S
FACE
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
CHECK
CASUALTY’S
ARMS
2
2
1
1
There may be:
 ■ Vicelike chest pain, spreading to one
or both arms
 ■ Breathlessness
 ■ Discomfort, like indigestion,
in upper abdomen
 ■ Sudden dizziness or faintness
 ■ Sudden collapse, with no warning
 ■ Casualty may have sense of
impending doom
 ■ Ashen skin and blueness of lips
 ■ Rapid, weak, or irregular pulse
 ■ Profuse sweating
 ■ Extreme gasping for air (air hunger)
Use the FAST (Face—Arms—
Speech—Time) guide (p.212) to
assess the casualty.
 ■ Facial weakness—casualty is unable
to smile evenly
 ■ Arm weakness—casualty may only
be able to move the arm on one side
of his body
 ■ Speech problems
There may also be:
 ■ Weakness or numbness along one
side of entire body
 ■ Sudden blurring or loss
of vision
 ■ Difficulty understanding the
spoken word
 ■ Sudden confusion
 ■ Dizziness, unsteadiness, or a
sudden fall
RECOGNITION
RECOGNITION
263
HEART ATTACK | STROKE
 ■ Be aware of the possibility of
collapse without warning.
 ■ Do not give the casualty aspirin
if he is allergic to it.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness, lay him on his
back, then assess breathing
(p.256). Be prepared to begin
CPR with compressions
(pp.258–59).
 ■ Do not give the casualty
anything to eat or drink; he may
find it hard to swallow.
 ■ If the person is unconscious
and is not breathing normally,
begin CPR with chest
compressions (p.258).
If the casualty is fully conscious,
help him take one full dose aspirin
tablet (325mg); advise him to
chew it slowly. If the casualty has
tablets or a spray for angina, allow
him to take it himself. Help him
if necessary.
Ask the casualty some questions.
Can he speak and/or can
he understand what you
are saying?
Encourage the casualty to rest.
Keep any bystanders away.
Monitor and record the casualty’s
vital signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse—until
emergency help arrives.
Call 911 for emergency help. Tell
the dispatcher that you suspect
a stroke. Reassure the casualty
and monitor and record his
vital signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse—until
help arrives.
GIVE CASUALTY
MEDICATION
CHECK
CASUALTY’S
SPEECH
MONITOR
CASUALTY
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
FIND OUT MORE p.211
FIND OUT MORE pp.212–13
4
4
3
3
CAUTION
CAUTION
264
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
CHOKING ADULT
CHOKING CHILD ONE YEAR TO PUBERTY
If the casualty is breathing,
encourage her to cough to try to
remove the obstruction herself. If
this fails, go to step 2.
If the child is breathing,
encourage her to cough to try to
remove the obstruction herself. If
this fails, go to step 2.
Stand behind the casualty. Put
both arms around her, and put one
fist between her navel and the
bottom of her breastbone. Grasp
your fist with your other hand, and
pull sharply inward and upward
until the object is dislodged.
Stand behind the child. Put your
arms around her, and put one fist
between her navel and the bottom
of her breastbone. Grasp your fist
with your other hand, and pull
sharply inward and upward until
the object is expelled.
ENCOURAGE
CASUALTY TO
COUGH
ENCOURAGE
CHILD TO
COUGH
GIVE ABDOMINAL
THRUSTS
GIVE ABDOMINAL
THRUSTS
2
2
1
1
Ask the casualty: “Are you
choking?”
Mild obstruction:
 ■ Difficulty in speaking, coughing
and breathing
Severe obstruction:
 ■ Inability to speak, cough,
or breathe
 ■ Eventual unconsciousness.
Ask the child: “Are you choking?”
Mild obstruction:
 ■ Difficulty in speaking, coughing, and
breathing
Severe obstruction:
 ■ Inability to speak, cough, or breathe
 ■ Eventual unconsciousness
RECOGNITION
RECOGNITION
265
Call 911 for emergency help if the
casualty loses consciousness,
then begin CPR starting with
chest compressions.
Continue abdominal thrusts until
the obstruction clears. If the child
loses consciousness, call 911 for
emergency help, then begin CPR
starting with chest compressions.
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
FIND OUT MORE p.94
FIND OUT MORE p.95
3
3
CHOKING ADULT | CHOKING CHILD
 ■ Do not do a finger sweep when
checking the mouth.
 ■ Seek medical advice for any
child who has been given
abdominal thrusts.
 ■ If the child loses consciousness,
assess for breathing (p.256).
Be prepared to begin
CPR (pp.260–61).
 ■ Do not do a finger sweep when
checking the mouth.
 ■ Seek medical advice for any
adult who has been given
abdominal thrusts.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness, assess for
breathing (p.256). Be prepared
to give CPR, beginning with
compressions (p.258).
CAUTION
CAUTION
266
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
CHOKING INFANT UNDER ONE YEAR
MENINGITIS
If the infant is unable to cough or
breathe, lay him face down along
your forearm (head low), and
support his body and head. Give
up to five back blows between the
shoulder blades with the heel of
your hand.
If you notice any signs of
meningitis, such as the casualty
shielding her eyes from light
or a stiff neck, seek urgent
medical advice.
Turn the infant face up along
your other forearm, supporting
his back and head. Check the
mouth. Pick out any obvious
obstructions. If choking persists,
proceed to step 3.
Keep the casualty cool and give
plenty of water to replace fluids
lost through sweating. An adult
may take the recommended dose
of acetaminophen or ibuprofen
tablets; a child may have acetaminophen or ibuprofen syrup.
GIVE UP TO FIVE
BACK BLOWS
SEEK MEDICAL
ADVICE
CHECK INFANT’S
MOUTH
TREAT FEVER
2
2
1
1
Mild obstruction:
 ■ Able to cough but difficulty
in breathing or making
any noise
Severe obstruction:
 ■ Inability to cough, make any noise,
or breathe
 ■ Eventual unconsciousness
Some, but not all, of these
symptoms may be present:
 ■ Flulike illness with a high
temperature
 ■ Cold hands and feet
 ■ Joint and/or limb pain
 ■ Mottled or very pale skin
As infection develops:
 ■ Neck stiffness
 ■ Eyes become sensitive to light
 ■ Drowsiness
 ■ A distinctive rash of red or purple
spots that look like bruises and do
not fade when pressed
 ■ In infants, a high-pitched moaning or
whimpering cry, floppiness, and a
tense or bulging fontanelle (soft part
of the skull)
RECOGNITION
RECOGNITION
267
CHOKING INFANT | MENINGITIS
Place two fingertips on
the lower half of the infant’s
breastbone, in the nipple line.
Give up to five compressions.
Recheck the mouth.
Repeat steps 1 to 3 until the object
is expelled or the infant loses
consciousness. Do CPR on the
unconscious infant for two
minutes, call 911 for emergency
help, then continue CPR until
help arrives.
Call 911 for emergency help
if you see signs of the rash, or
if medical help is delayed.
Reassure the casualty. Keep her
cool and monitor and record her
level of response, breathing, and
pulse until help arrives.
Check the casualty for signs
of the meningitis rash: press
against the rash with the side of a
glass. Most rashes will fade when
pressed; if you can still see the
rash through the glass, it is
probably meningitis.
GIVE UP TO
FIVE CHEST
COMPRESSIONS
CHECK FOR SIGNS
OF RASH
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
FIND OUT MORE p.96
FIND OUT MORE p.220
4
4
3
3
 ■ Do not do a finger sweep when
checking the mouth.
 ■ Do not use abdominal thrusts
on an infant.
 ■ If the infant loses consciousness,
open the airway and assess for
breathing (p.256). Be prepared
to begin CPR (pp.260–61).
 ■ If a second rescuer is present,
send him to call 911
immediately, as soon as you
discover the choking infant.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing normally (p.256),
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.258–61).
 ■ The rescuer should also seek
medical advice because
prophylactic antibiotics may
be necessary.
CAUTION
CAUTION
268
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
ASTHMA
ANAPHYLACTIC SHOCK
Keep calm and reassure the
casualty. Help her find and use her
inhaler (it is usually blue or white);
use a spacer device if she has one.
The inhaler should take effect
within minutes.
Call 911 for emergency help.
Ideally, ask someone to make the
call while you treat the casualty.
Tell the dispatcher that you
suspect anaphylaxis and tell him
the possible cause.
Help the casualty into a
comfortable breathing position;
sitting slightly forward is best. Tell
her to breathe slowly and deeply.
A mild attack should ease within a
few minutes. If it does not, ask the
casualty to take another dose
from her inhaler.
If the casualty has an autoinjector of epinephrine, help her
use it. If she is unable to take the
medication, administer it yourself.
Hold it in your fist, pull off the
safety cap, and push the tip firmly
against the casualty’s thigh until
it clicks (through clothing
if necessary).
HELP CASUALTY
USE INHALER
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
ENCOURAGE
SLOW BREATHS
HELP CASUALTY
WITH
MEDICATION
2
2
1
1
 ■ Difficulty in breathing, especially
breathing out
There may be:
 ■ Wheezing
 ■ Difficulty speaking
 ■ Gray-blue coloring in skin, lips,
earlobes, and nailbeds
In a severe attack:
 ■ Exhaustion and possible loss
of consciousness
There may be:
 ■ Anxiety
 ■ Red, blotchy skin, itchy rash, and red,
itchy, watery eyes
 ■ Swelling of hands, feet, and face
 ■ Puffiness around the eyes
 ■ Abdominal pain, vomiting,
and diarrhea
 ■ Difficulty breathing, ranging from
tight chest to severe difficulty, which
causes wheezing and gasping for air
 ■ Swelling of tongue and throat
 ■ A feeling of terror
 ■ Confusion and agitation
 ■ Signs of shock (p.270) leading
to unconsciousness
RECOGNITION
RECOGNITION
269
ASTHMA | ANAPHYLACTIC SHOCK
Call 911 for emergency help
if the inhaler has no effect,
breathlessness makes talking
difficult, or the casualty is
becoming exhausted.
Reassure the casualty and
help her sit in a position that
eases any breathing difficulties.
If she becomes very pale with
a weak pulse, lay her down
with legs raised as for shock.
Monitor and record the casualty’s
vital signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse—until she
recovers or help arrives. Help her
use her inhaler as required. Advise
the casualty to seek medical
advice if she is concerned
about the attack.
Monitor and record vital signs—
level of response, breathing,
and pulse—until help arrives.
Repeat the epinephrine dose
every five minutes if there is no
improvement or the casualty’s
symptoms return.
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
MAKE CASUALTY
COMFORTABLE
MONITOR
CASUALTY
MONITOR
CASUALTY
FIND OUT MORE p.102
FIND OUT MORE p.223
4
4
3
3
 ■ Do not let the casualty lie down.
 ■ Do not leave the casualty
alone because the attack
may quickly worsen.
 ■ If this is a first attack and she
has no medication, call 911 for
emergency help immediately.
 ■ If the attack worsens, the
casualty may lose consciousness.
Lay her on her back, then assess
breathing (p.256). Be prepared
to begin CPR (pp.258–61).
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing normally (p.256),
begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.258–61).
CAUTION
CAUTION
270
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
SEVERE EXTERNAL BLEEDING
SHOCK
Remove or cut off any clothing
over the wound if necessary. Place
a sterile wound dressing or gauze
pad over the wound. Apply firm
pressure with your fingers or the
palm of your hand.
Maintaining pressure on the
wound, raise and support the
injured part so that it is above the
level of the casualty’s heart.
Help the casualty lie down (ideally
on a blanket). Raise and support
his legs above the level of his
heart. Treat any cause of shock,
such as bleeding (above) or
burns (pp.274–75).
Keeping the injury high, help the
casualty lie down on a blanket.
Raise and support his legs to
minimize the risk of shock (below).
Keep the casualty’s head
low. Loosen any clothing that
constricts his neck, chest,
and waist.
APPLY DIRECT
PRESSURE TO
WOUND
RAISE AND
SUPPORT
INJURED PART
HELP CASUALTY
LIE DOWN
LAY CASUALTY
DOWN
LOOSEN TIGHT 2 CLOTHING
32
1
1
 ■ Rapid pulse
 ■ Pale, cold, clammy skin
 ■ Sweating
As shock develops:
 ■ Rapid, shallow breathing
 ■ Weak pulse
 ■ Gray-blue skin, especially inside lips
 ■ Weakness and giddiness
 ■ Nausea and vomiting
 ■ Thirst
As the brain’s oxygen
supply weakens:
 ■ Restlessness
 ■ Gasping for air
 ■ Loss of consciousness
RECOGNITION
271
SEVERE EXTERNAL BLEEDING | SHOCK
Cover the casualty with a blanket
to keep him warm. Advise the
casualty not to move.
Call 911 for emergency help. Give
details of the site of the injury and
the extent of the bleeding when
you telephone. Monitor and
record vital signs—level of
response, breathing, and pulse—
until emergency help arrives.
Call 911 for emergency help.
Give the dispatcher details about
the cause of shock, if known.
Monitor and record vital signs—
level of response, breathing, and
pulse—until help arrives.
Secure a pad over the wound with
a bandage. Check the circulation
beyond the bandage every ten
minutes. Loosen and reapply the
bandage if necessary.
KEEP CASUALTY
WARM
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
BANDAGE
DRESSING IN
PLACE
FIND OUT MORE pp.114–15
FIND OUT MORE pp.112–13
4 5
43
 ■ If there is an object in the
wound, apply pressure on
either side of the wound to
control bleeding.
 ■ If blood seeps through the
bandage, place another pad
on top.
 ■ Do not apply a tourniquet
unless you have been trained
and severe bleeding cannot
be stopped.
 ■ Do not give the casualty
anything to eat or drink—an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness, and is not
breathing, begin CPR
with chest compressions
(pp.258–61).
 ■ Do not leave the casualty
unattended, unless you are on
your own and have to call for
emergency help.
 ■ Do not let the casualty move.
 ■ Do not try to warm the casualty
with a hot-water bottle or any
other form of direct heat.
 ■ Do not give the casualty
anything to eat or drink because
an anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing, begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.258–61).
CAUTION
CAUTION
272
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
HEAD INJURY
SPINAL INJURY
Replace any displaced skin flaps
over the wound. Put a sterile
dressing or a clean gauze pad over
the wound. Apply firm, direct
pressure with your hand to control
the bleeding.
Continue to hold his head
and ask a helper to place
rolled towels, or other padding,
around the casualty’s neck and
shoulders for extra support.
Secure the dressing over the
wound with a roller bandage to
help maintain direct pressure
on the injury.
Tell the casualty not to move. Sit
or kneel behind his head and,
resting your arms on the ground,
grasp either side of the casualty’s
head and hold it still. Do not cover
his ears.
APPLY DIRECT
PRESSURE TO ANY
WOUND
PLACE EXTRA
SUPPORT
AROUND HEAD
SECURE
DRESSING WITH
BANDAGE
STEADY AND 1 SUPPORT HEAD
21
2
 ■ Can occur after a fall from a height
onto the back, head, or feet
There may be:
 ■ Pain in neck or back
 ■ Step, irregularity, or twist in the
normal curve of the spine
 ■ Tenderness in the skin over
the spine
 ■ Weakness or loss of movement in
the limbs
 ■ Loss of sensation, or
abnormal sensation
 ■ Loss of bladder and/or bowel control
 ■ Difficulty breathing.
There may be:
 ■ A scalp wound
 ■ Clear fluid or watery blood from the
nose or an ear (this indicates a
serious underlying head injury)
 ■ Impaired consciousness
RECOGNITION
RECOGNITION
273
HEAD INJURY | SPINAL INJURY
Call 911 for emergency help. If
possible, ask a helper to make the
call while you support the
casualty’s head and neck. Tell
the dispatcher that a spinal injury
is suspected.
Help the casualty lie down, ideally
on a blanket. Ensure that his head
and shoulders are slightly raised.
Make him as comfortable
as possible.
Monitor and record the casualty’s
vital signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse. Call 911 for
emergency help if there are any
signs of severe head injury.
Monitor and record the casualty’s
vital signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse—until
help arrives.
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
HELP CASUALTY
LIE DOWN
MONITOR
CASUALTY
MONITOR
CASUALTY
FIND OUT MORE pp.144–45
FIND OUT MORE pp.157–59
4
4
3
3
 ■ If blood seeps through the pad,
place a second one on top of
the first.
 ■ Be aware of the possibility of
concussion.
 ■ Monitor a casualty after a head
injury. If he recovers initially,
but deteriorates hours or days
later, call 911for emergency
help immediately.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing, begin CPR with chest
compressions (pp.258–61).
 ■ Always suspect the possibility
of a neck (spinal) injury.
 ■ Do not move the casualty unless
he is in danger.
 ■ If the casualty is unconscious,
and is not breathing, begin
CPR with chest compressions
(pp.258–61).
 ■ If you need to turn the casualty
into the recovery position use
the log-roll technique.
CAUTION
CAUTION
274
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
BROKEN BONES
BURNS AND SCALDS
Help the casualty support the
affected part at the joints above
and below the injury, in the most
comfortable position.
Make the casualty comfortable by
helping him sit or lie down. Flood
the injury with cold water; cool for
at least ten minutes or until pain
is relieved.
Place padding, such as towels
or cushions, around the affected
part to support it.
Call 911 for emergency help if
necessary. Tell the dispatcher that
the injury is a burn and explain
what caused it, and the estimated
size and depth.
SUPPORT
INJURED PART
START TO COOL
BURN
PROTECT INJURY
WITH PADDING
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
2
2
1
1
 ■ Distortion, swelling, and bruising at
the injury site
 ■ Pain and difficulty in moving the
injured part
There may be:
 ■ Bending, twisting, or shortening
of a limb
 ■ A wound, possibly with bone
ends protruding
There may be:
 ■ Possible areas of superficial,
partial-thickness, and/or
full-thickness burns
 ■ Pain in the area of the burn
 ■ Breathing difficulties if the airway
is affected
 ■ Swelling and blistering of
the skin
 ■ Signs of shock
RECOGNITION
RECOGNITION
275
BROKEN BONES | BURNS AND SCALDS
For extra support or if help is
delayed, secure the injured part to
an uninjured part of the body. For
upper body injuries, use a sling;
for lower limb injuries, use broadand narrow-fold bandages. Tie
knots on the uninjured side.
While you are cooling the burn,
carefully remove any clothing or
jewelry from the area before it
starts to swell; a helper can do this
for you. Do not remove anything
that is sticking to the burn.
A casualty with an arm injury
could be taken by car if not in
shock, but a leg injury should go
by ambulance, so call 911 for
emergency help. Treat for shock.
Monitor and record the casualty’s
level of response, breathing, and
pulse until help arrives.
Cover the burn with plastic wrap
placed lengthwise over the injury,
or use a plastic bag. Alternatively,
use a sterile dressing or clean
gauze pad. Monitor and record
the casualty’s level of response,
breathing, and pulse while waiting
for help.
SUPPORT WITH
SLINGS OR
BANDAGES
REMOVE ANY
CONSTRICTIONS
TAKE OR SEND
CASUALTY TO THE
HOSPITAL
COVER BURN
FIND OUT MORE pp.136–38
FIND OUT MORE pp.174–75
4
4
3
3
 ■ Do not attempt to move an injured
limb unnecessarily, or if it causes
further pain.
 ■ If there is an open wound, cover it
with a sterile dressing or a clean
gauze pad and bandage it in place.
 ■ Do not give the casualty anything
to eat or drink because an
anesthetic may be needed.
 ■ Do not raise an injured leg when
treating a casualty for shock.
 ■ Do not apply specialized dressings,
lotions, or fat to a burn, but
bacitracin can be used on first
degree burns.
 ■ Do not use adhesive dressings.
 ■ Do not touch the burn or burst
any blisters.
 ■ If the burn is severe, treat the
casualty for shock (p.270).
 ■ If the burn is on the face, do
not cover it. Keep cooling with
water until help arrives.
 ■ If the burn is caused by contact
with chemicals, wear protective
gloves and irrigate for at least
20 minutes.
 ■ Watch the casualty for signs of
smoke inhalation, such as
difficulty breathing.
CAUTION
CAUTION
276
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
SEIZURES IN ADULTS
SEIZURES IN CHILDREN
Try to ease the casualty’s fall. Talk
to him calmly and reassuringly.
Clear away any potentially
dangerous objects to prevent
injury to the casualty. Ask
bystanders to keep clear. Make a
note of when the seizure began.
Clear away any nearby objects
and surround the child with
soft padding, such as pillows
or rolled towels, so that even
violent movement will not
result in injury.
If possible, cushion the casualty’s
head with soft material until the
seizure ceases. Place padding to
protect him from objects that
cannot be moved. Loosen any
tight clothing around the
casualty’s neck.
If the seizures are febrile, take
off bedding and clothing, such
as a undershirt or pajama top; you
may have to wait until the seizure
stops to do this. Ensure a good
supply of cool air, but do not let
the child become too cold.
PROTECT
CASUALTY
PROTECT CHILD
FROM INJURY
PROTECT HEAD
AND LOOSEN
TIGHT CLOTHING
HELP THE CHILD
COOL DOWN
2
2
1
1
Seizures often follow a pattern:
 ■ Sudden loss of consciousness, often
with a cry
 ■ Rigidity and arching of the back
 ■ Breathing may become difficult. The
lips may show a gray-blue tinge
(cyanosis) and the face and neck may
become red and puffy
 ■ Possible loss of bladder or
bowel control
 ■ Muscles relax
 ■ After the seizure the casualty may
be dazed and unaware of what
has happened
 ■ Casualty falls into a deep sleep
 ■ Violent muscle twitching, arched
back and clenched fists
 ■ Signs of fever, such as hot,
flushed skin
 ■ A twitching face and squinting, fixed
or upturned eyes
 ■ Breath-holding, with red, puffy face
and neck
 ■ Drooling at the mouth
 ■ Loss of, or impaired, consciousness
RECOGNITION
RECOGNITION
SEIZURES IN ADULTS | SEIZURES IN CHILDREN
277
Once the seizure has stopped the
casualty may fall into a deep sleep.
Assess for normal breathing;
if present, place him in the
recovery position.
Once the seizure has stopped,
open the airway and check
breathing (p.256). If the child
is breathing, place him in the
recovery position.
Monitor and record vital signs—
level of response, breathing, and
pulse—until he recovers. Note the
duration of the seizure.
Call 911 for emergency help.
Reassure parents or caregiver, if
necessary. Monitor and record the
child’s vital signs—level of
response, breathing, pulse, and
temperature—until help arrives.
PLACE CASUALTY
IN RECOVERY
POSITION
PLACE CHILD
IN RECOVERY
POSITION
MONITOR
CASUALTY’S
RECOVERY
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
FIND OUT MORE pp.216–17
FIND OUT MORE p.218
4
4
3
3
 ■ Do not attempt to restrain
the casualty.
 ■ Do not put anything in his
mouth during a seizure.
 ■ Call 911 for emergency help if
the casualty is having repeated
seizures; a seizure lasts more
than five minutes; it is a
casualty’s first seizure; or the
casualty remains unconscious
for more than ten minutes after
the seizure.
 ■ Do not let the child get
too cold.
 ■ If the child loses consciousness
and is not breathing, begin CPR
with chest compressions
(pp.260–61).
CAUTION
CAUTION
278
EMERGENCY FIRST AID
SWALLOWED POISONS
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Reassure the casualty. If she
is conscious, ask her what she has
swallowed. Look for clues such as
poisonous leaves or berries, or
containers or pill bottles.
Help the casualty sit down. Give
him a sugary drink.
Call the Poison Control Center
(800-222-1222) or 911 for
emergency help, and tell the
dispatcher what she took, how
much, and when. This helps
doctors give the casualty the
correct treatment.
If the casualty responds to the
drink, give him more sugar in the
form of sugar packets or sweet
food. If he has glucose gel, help
him take it. Help him find his
glucose testing kit so that he can
check his glucose levels.
IDENTIFY THE
POISON
GIVE CASUALTY
SUGAR
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
GIVE SOME
SUGARY FOOD
2
2
1
1
 ■ A history of ingestion/exposure to
poison; evidence of poison nearby
Depending on what the casualty
has taken, there may be:
 ■ Vomit that may be bloodstained
 ■ Diarrhea
 ■ Cramping abdominal pains
 ■ Pain or burning sensation
 ■ Impaired consciousness
There may be:
 ■ A history of diabetes—the casualty
may recognize the onset of a
hypoglycemic (low blood
sugar) attack
 ■ Weakness, faintness, or hunger
 ■ Confusion and irrational behavior
 ■ Sweating with cold, clammy skin
 ■ Palpitations and muscle tremors
 ■ A deteriorating level of response
 ■ A medical alert tag or bracelet,
glucose gel, medication, or insulin
syringe/pen in his possession
RECOGNITION
RECOGNITION
279
Monitor and record the casualty’s
vital signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse—until
help arrives.
Monitor and record the casualty’s
vital signs—level of response,
breathing, and pulse—until he is
fully recovered.
If the casualty has swallowed a
substance that has burned her
lips, give her frequent sips of cool
milk or water.
If the casualty’s condition
does not improve, look for other
causes of his condition. Call 911
for emergency help. Continue
to monitor his vital signs until
help arrives.
MONITOR
CASUALTY
MONITOR
CASUALTY
IF CASUALTY’S
LIPS ARE BURNED
CALL FOR
EMERGENCY
HELP
FIND OUT MORE p.200
FIND OUT MORE p.215
4
4
3
3
SWALLOWED POISONS | HYPOGLYCEMIA
 ■ Do not attempt to
induce vomiting.
 ■ If the casualty is contaminated
with chemicals, wear protective
equipment such as disposable
gloves, a mask, and goggles if
you have them.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness, make sure there
is no vomit or other matter in
the mouth. Check for normal
breathing; if absent, begin CPR
with chest compressions
(pp.258–61).
 ■ If there are chemicals on the
casualty’s mouth, protect
yourself by using a face shield
or pocket mask when giving
rescue breaths.
 ■ If consciousness is impaired, do
not give the casualty anything
to eat or drink.
 ■ If the casualty loses
consciousness and is not
breathing or just gasping, begin
CPR with chest compressions
(pp.258–61).
CAUTION
CAUTION
280
APPENDIX
FIRST AID REGULATIONS
First aid may be practiced in any situation
where injuries or illnesses occur. In many
cases, the first person on the scene is a
volunteer who wants to help, rather than
someone who is medically trained. However,
in certain circumstances the provision of first
aid, and first aid responsibilities, is defined
by statutes. In the US, these regulations
apply to incidents occurring in the workplace
and to mass gatherings.
FIRST AID AT WORK
The Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations
of 1970 place a general duty on employers to
make first aid provision for employees in case
of injury or illness in the workplace. The
practical aspects of this statutory duty for
employers and for self-employed persons are
set out in the approved code of practice,
which is revised periodically to ensure that
the appropriate standards are maintained.
Regular occupational first aiders should make
sure they are familiar with the code of practice
and guidance notes.
The current code of practice stresses the
aims of the first aid provision and encourages
all employers to assess their organization’s
ability to meet those aims. The number of first
aiders required in a specific workplace is
dependent on the risk assessment, which
should be carried out by the Compliance Safety
and Health Officer in the workplace. There is
a checklist (opposite) to assist in determining
the number and type of first aid personnel
required in a workplace. The approved code of
practice also contains guidance on first aid
materials, equipment, and facilities.
Comprehensive advice regarding first aid in
the workplace can also be found at
www.osha.gov.
ACCIDENT BOOK
An employer has the overall responsibility for
an accident book, but it is the responsibility
of the first aider or appointed person to look
after the book.
If an employee is involved in an incident
in the workplace, the following details should
be recorded in the accident book.
 ■ Date, time, and place of incident
 ■ Name and job of the injured or ill person
 ■ Details of the injury/illness and what first aid
was given
 ■ What happened to the person immediately
afterward (for example, went home or was
taken to the hospital)
 ■ Name and signature of the first aider or
person dealing with the incident
REPORTING OF INJURIES,
DISEASES, AND DANGEROUS
OCCURRENCES
In the event of injury or ill health at work,
an employer has a legal obligation to report
the incident. The Occupational Safety and
Health Act (1970), under the “record-keeping
rule” and the revised record-keeping rules
of 2002, requires an employer to report
the following:
 ■ Deaths
 ■ Major injuries
 ■ Injuries lasting more than three days—
where an employee or self-employed person
is unable to perform his normal work duties
 ■ Injuries to members of the public or
people not at work, when they are taken
from the scene of an accident to the hospital
 ■ Some work-related diseases
 ■ Some dangerous occurrences such as a
near miss, where something happens that
could have resulted in an injury
281
FIRST AID REGULATIONS
FACTORS TO CONSIDER IMPACT ON FIRST AID PROVISION
Is your workplace low risk (for
example, stores and offices)?
Is your workplace higher risk (for
example, such as food processing
or dangerous machinery?
Do your work activities involve
special hazards, such as hydrofluoric
acid or confined spaces?
How many people are employed
on site?
Are there inexperienced workers
on site, or employees with
disabilities or special
health problems?
What is your record of accidents
and ill health? What injuries and
illness have occurred and where?
Do you have employees who
travel a lot, work remotely, or
work alone?
Do any of your employees work
shifts or overtime?
Are the premises spread out; for
example, are there several
buildings on the site or
multifloor buildings?
Is your workplace remote from
emergency medical services?
Do any of your employees work at
sites occupied by other employers?
Do you have sufficient provision
to cover absences of first aiders
or appointed persons?
Do members of the public visit
your premises?
The minimum provision is: ■ An appointed person to take charge of first aid
arrangements ■ A suitably stocked first aid box.
You should consider: ■ Providing first aiders ■ Additional training for first
aiders to deal with injuries resulting from special hazards ■ Additional first aid
equipment ■ Precise siting of first aid equipment
■ Providing a first aid room ■ Informing the emergency services.
Where there are small numbers of employees, the minimum provision is:
■ An appointed person to take charge of first aid arrangements ■ A suitably
stocked first aid box.
Because there is still the possibility of an accident or sudden illness, you
should consider providing a qualified first aider.
Where there are large numbers of employees, consider providing:
■ First aiders ■ Additional first aid equipment ■ A first aid room.
You should consider: ■ Additional training for first aiders ■ Additional first
aid equipment ■ Local siting of first-aid equipment.
Your first aid provision should cover any work-experience trainees.
Make sure your first aid provision caters for the type of injury and illness
that might occur in your workplace. Monitor accidents and ill health and
review your first aid provision as appropriate.
You should consider: ■ Personal first aid kits ■ Personal communicators to
remote workers ■ Cell phones to lone workers.
Make sure there is adequate first aid provision at all times while people are
at work.
You should consider: ■ First aid provision in each building or on each floor.
You should consider: ■ Special arrangements with the emergency services
■ Informing the emergency services of your location.
Make arrangements with other site occupiers to ensure adequate provision of
first aid. A written agreement between employers is strongly recommended.
You should consider what cover is needed for: ■ Annual leave and other
planned absences ■ Unplanned and exceptional absences.
Under the regulations, you have no legal obligation to provide first aid for
nonemployees, but the Site Contractors should be included them in your first
aid provision. This is particularly relevant in workplaces that provide a service;
e.g., schools, places of entertainment, fairgrounds, stores.
CHECKLIST FOR ASSESSMENT OF FIRST AID NEEDS
282
INDEX
INDEX
ABC check 45
Abdomen
examining for injury
51
pain 226
stitch 226
wound 128
Abrasions 20, 111
Absence seizures 216
Aches
abdominal pain 226
earache 225
headache 224
toothache 225
Adhesive dressings 235
applying 241
Adhesive tape 237
securing roller bandages 244
Adrenaline see Epinephrine
Afterbirth, delivery of 228, 229
Agonal breathing 59
Aids
HIV infection 16
human bites 203
Air travel, earache 225
Airway
breathing difficulties 88–105
burns 177
checking 44
croup 103
hanging and strangulation 97
inhalation of fumes 98–99
obstruction 92–95
unconscious casualty 93
opening 59
adults 63
children 73
infants 80
jaw thrust method 159
respiratory system 90–91
Alcohol poisoning 202
Allergy 222
anaphylactic shock 223
asthma 102
Alveoli 56, 90
Amphetamines, overdose 201
Amputation 117
Anesthetic, poisoning 201
Anaphylactic shock 223
emergency first aid 268–69
Angina pectoris 210
drugs 48
Animal bites 203
Ankles
bandaging 160
fractures 163
sprains 140–41
Anus, bleeding from 116
Arms
bandaging 245
slings 251
examining for injury 50
immobilizing 243
Arms continued
injuries 149–55
elbow 151
forearm and wrist 152
hand and fingers 153
upper arm 150
muscles 134
wounds
amputation 117
bleeding at elbow crease 127
fingers 126
Arteries
bleeding from 110
circulatory system 108
pulse 53
severe bleeding 114–15
Artificial ventilation
see Rescue breathing
Aspirin
heart attack and 211, 263
overdose 201
Assessing casualties 39–53, 256–57
examining casualty 49–51
primary survey 41, 44–45
secondary survey 41, 46–48
symptoms and signs 50–51
unconscious casualties:
adults 62
children 72
infants 80
Assessing a situation 28
Asthma 102
emergency first aid 268–69
inhalers 48
Auto-injectors 48
using, 223, 268
Automated external defibrillators
(AED) 54, 57, 84–87
for children 87
Autonomic nerves 143
AVPU code, checking level of response
52, 144
B
Babies see Infants
Back injuries 157–59
emergency first aid 272–73
examining for 51
pain 156
recovery position 65, 75
treatment 158–59
Bacteria, food poisoning 199
Bandages 236, 242–49
checking circulation 243
choosing correct size 244
elbow and knee 246
first aid kit 236–37
general rules 242–43
hand and wrist 247
immobilizing limb 243
roller bandages 236, 244–47
triangular bandages 236, 249–52
tubular bandages 236, 248
Barbiturates, overdose 201
Bee stings 204
allergy to 222
Benzodiazepines, overdose 201
Biohazard bags 18
Birth 228–29
Bites and stings 190, 203–07
anaphylactic shock 223
animal bites 190, 203
human bites 190, 203
insect stings 190, 204–05
marine creatures 190, 207
rabies 203
snake bites 206
tetanus 203
ticks 205
Bleeding
bruising 119
checking for 49–51
childbirth 229
emergency first aid 270–71
from ear 123
from mouth 125
internal bleeding 116
miscarriage 228
nosebleeds 124
severe bleeding 114–15
shock 112–13
types of 110
types of wound 111
vaginal 128
varicose veins 129
see also Wounds
Blisters 120
burns 183
Blood
circulatory system 56, 88, 108–09
clotting 110
composition 109
see also Bleeding
Blood pressure 108
Body temperature 171
fever 219
frostbite 189
heat exhaustion 184
heatstroke 185
hypothermia 186–88
taking 53
Bones
joints 135
skeleton 132–33
structure 134
see also Fractures
Bracelets, medical warning 48
Brachial pulse 53
Brain
absence seizures 216
cerebral compression 144
concussion 144
head injury 144–45
heatstroke 185
meningitis 220, 266–67
nervous system 142–43
oxygen deprivation 54, 59
A
283
INDEX
Brain continued
seizures 216–17
skull fracture 144
stroke 212–13
see also Unconsciousness
Breathing
agonal 59
airway obstruction 93
asthma 102, 268–69
checking 44, 52
unconscious adult 63
unconscious child 73
unconscious infant 81
circulatory system 56
croup 103
examining for injury 49,
50
fume inhalation 98–99
hyperventilation 101
opening airway 59
adults 63
children 73
infants 80
rescue breathing 59
adults 68–69
children 76–77
infants 82–83
respiratory system 91
Broad-fold bandages 249
Bruises 111
cold compresses 241
treatment 119
Bullet wounds 111
Burns 172–81
airway 177
assessing 172–73
chemical 179–80
depth 173
dressing 176
electrical 172, 178
emergency first aid 274–75
flash burns to eye 181
minor burns and scalds 176
severe burns and scalds 174–75
sunburn 183
swallowed poisons 200
Bystanders 29–31
C
Capillaries
bleeding 110
circulatory system 90, 108
Car accidents
see Traffic accidents
Carbon dioxide
hyperventilation 101
inhalation of 98
respiratory system 90
Carbon monoxide 33
inhalation of 98
Cardiac arrest 84
in water 36
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
see CPR
Carotid pulse 53
Cartilage 135
Casualties
assessing 31, 39–53, 256–57
unconscious 62, 70, 78
dealing with 19–21
examining 49–51
handling 234
monitoring vital signs 52–53
moving 234
multiple 31
passing on information 23
removing clothing 232
resisting help 20
unconscious 54–87
see also Emergencies
Central nervous system 143
Cerebral compression 144
Cerebrospinal fluid 143
Cheekbone fractures 147
Chemicals
burns 172, 179–80
CS spray 181
Hazmat symbols 31
in eye 180, 199
inhaled gases 199
pepper spray 181
on skin 199
swallowed poisons 200
Chest, “flail-chest” injury 154
Chest compressions 57
adults 66–67, 70–71, 258–59
chest-compression-only CPR 70–71,
children 78
children 77–78, 261
infants 83, 261
pregnant casualties 68
Chest injuries
penetrating wounds 104–05
rib cage fractures 154
Chest pain 104, 210, 211
Childbirth 228–29
miscarriage 208, 228
stages 228
Children
chest compressions 77–78, 259
choking 95, 264–65
croup 103
dealing with 19
dehydration 182
nosebleeds 124
recovery positions 74–75
rescue breathing 76–77, 260–61
resuscitation 61, 72–79, 260–61
seizures 218, 276–77
see also Infants
Choking 94–96
adults 94
children 95
emergency first aid 264–67
infants 96
Circulatory system 56, 90, 108–09
checking circulation after bandaging
243
children 76–79, 260–61,
infants 82–83, 260–61
problems 112–13, 212
anaphylactic shock 223
fainting 221
Circulatory system, problems continued
 heart disorders 210–11
 internal bleeding 116
 pulse 53
 shock 112–13
Cleansing wipes 237
Clips 237
securing roller bandages
244
Closed fractures 136
treatment 137
Clothing
on fire 33
improvised slings 253
removing 233
Clotting, blood 110
Cocaine, overdose 201
Cold
burns 172
frostbite 189
hypothermia 186–88
temperature control 171
Cold compresses 241
Collarbone, fractures 148
Colles’ fracture 152
Coma see Unconsciousness
Compresses, cold 241
Concussion 144
Consciousness
AVPU 52, 144
checking level of response 52
impaired consciousness 144
see also Unconsciousness
Contusions 111
Convulsions
see Seizures
Coral stings 207
Cornea, flash burns 181
Coronary arteries 210–11
CPR 57
adults 66–71, 258–9
chest-compression-only 70–71,
258–59
in children 78
children 76–79, 260–61
infants 82–83, 260–61
Cramp 167
stitch 226
Crash helmets, removing 233
Cross infection, preventing
16–18
Croup 103
Crush injuries 118
CS spray injury 181
Cuts 119
D
Defibrillators 54, 84–87
Dehydration 182
vomiting and diarrhea 227
Delayed reactions 25
Delivery, childbirth 228–29
Diabetes,
insulin pen for 48, 214
insulin pump for 214
insulin syringe for 214
284
INDEX
Diabetes mellitus 214, 214–15
hyperglycemia 214
hypoglycemia 208, 215, 278–79
Diarrhea 227
Digestive system
diarrhea 227
food poisoning 199
vomiting 227
Dislocated joints 139
shoulder 149
Dressings 235, 238–41
adhesive 241
applying 239–41
burns 175
first aid kit 235
gauze 240
improvised 240
non-sterile 240
sterile 235
applying 239–40
Drowning 100
Drugs
administering 24
assessing a casualty 48
poisoning 199
Drunkenness 202
E
Ears 193
bleeding from 124
earache 225
examining for injury 49
foreign objects 197
internal bleeding 116
Ecstasy
heat exhaustion 184
heatstroke 201
overdose 199
Elbows
bandaging 246
bleeding from joint crease 127
injuries 151
Elderly people
hypothermia 188
Electrical injuries 34–35
burns 168, 178
high voltage 34
lightning 35
low-voltage 35
Elevation slings 252
Emergencies, action at 19–37
assessing casualty 39–53, 256–57
assessing situation 28
controlling bystanders 29
electrical injuries 34–35
emergency first aid 254–79
fires 32–33
major incidents 37
moving casualties 234
multiple casualties 31
telephoning 911 for help 22
traffic accidents 30–31
triage 37
water rescue 36
Emotions, after an incident 24–25
Epiglottitis 90
Epilepsy 216–17
drugs 48
Epinephrine (adrenaline) autoinjectors 48
anaphylactic shock 223, 268–69
Eyes 192
chemical burn 179–80
examining for injury 49
flash burns 181
foreign objects 196
incapacitant spray injury 181
sterile eye pads 235
wounds 123
F
Face
burns 175, 177
examining for injury 50
fractures 146–47
Face shields and masks 236
for rescue breathing 69, 79
Fainting 221
Febrile convulsions 218
Feet
bandaging: triangular bandages 250
checking circulation 243
cramp 167
examining for injury 51
fractures 166
frostbite 189
Femur 132
fractures 160–61
Fever 219
febrile convulsions 218
Fibroblast cells 110
Fibula 132
fractures 162–63
“Fight or flight" response 15
Fingers
fractures 153
frostbite 189
wounds 126
tubular bandages 248
see also Hands
Fires 32–33
burns 172
smoke inhalation 98–99
First aid 11–37
being a first aider 14–15
emergency first aid 254–79
giving care with confidence 15
looking after yourself 16–18
materials 235–53
priorities 14
regulations and legislation 280
First aid courses 11
First aid kit 235–37
Fishhooks, embedded 195
“Flail-chest” injury 154
Food poisoning 199
Foot see Feet
Forearm, injuries 152
Foreign objects 190–97
in ear 197
in eye 196
in nose 197
Foreign objects continued
swallowed 195
in wounds 115, 121
Fractures 136–38
closed fractures 136
treatment 137
emergency first aid 274–75
open fractures 136
treatment 138
protruding bone 138
stable fractures 136
type of
ankle 162–63
arm 150–52
collarbone 148
facial 146–47
foot 166
hand 153
hip 160–61
leg 160–63
pelvis 155
rib cage 154
skull 144
spine 157–59
unstable fractures 136
Frostbite 189
Fuels, inhalation of 98
Fumes 33
inhalation of 98–99
G
Gases, inhaled 199
Gauze pads 237
Germs, cross infection 16–18
Gloves, disposable 236
Glue, poisoning 199
Gunshot wounds 111
H
Haemorrhage see Bleeding
Hallucinogens, overdose 199
Handling and moving casualties
234
Hands
bandaging
roller bandages 247
slings 252
triangular bandages 250
bones 132
checking circulation 243
injuries 153
palm wounds 127
see also Fingers
Hanging 97
Hazmat symbols 31
Head injuries 144
cerebral compression 144
concussion 144
emergency first aid 272–73
examining for 49
scalp wounds 122
skull fracture 144
wounds 122
Headache 224
Headgear, removing 233
285
INDEX
Health and Safety (First Aid)
Regulations (1970) 280
Heart
cardiac arrest 84
circulatory system 56, 90–91, 108–09
disorders 210–11
angina 210
heart attack 211
emergency first aid 262–63
heartbeat 108
restoring rhythm 59
defibrillators 59, 84–85
see also Resuscitation
Heat
body temperature 171
heat exhaustion 184
heatstroke 185
sunburn 183
Helicopter rescue 29
Helmets, removing 233
Help, requesting 22–23
Hepatitis
B 16
C 16
human bites 203
Heroin, overdose 201
High-voltage electricity 35
Hip fractures 160–61
HIV 16
human bites 203
Hooks, fish 195
Hormones, “fight or flight response” 15
Hornet stings 204
Human bites 190, 203
Humerus 132
Hygiene
childbirth 229
preventing cross infection 16–18
Hyperglycemia 214
Hyperventilation 101
Hypoglycemia 208, 215
emergency first aid 278–79
Hypothermia 186–88
Hypoxia 92
I
Ice packs 241
Immunization 16
Impalement 117
Improvised dressings 240
Improvised slings 253
Incapacitant spray exposure 181
Incised wounds 111
Industrial chemicals 199
Infants
assessing casualties 80
childbirth 228–29
choking 96, 266–67
dehydration 182
hypothermia 188
pulse 53
recovery position 81
rescue breaths 82, 260–61
resuscitation 61, 82–83, 260–61
Infection
childbirth 229
Infection continued
cross infection 16–18
in wounds 120
Information, passing on 23
Inhalation
fumes 98–99
gases 199
respiratory system 91
Inhalers, asthma 48, 102
Injuries, mechanisms of
42–43
Insects
in ears 197
stings 190, 204–05
Insulin
diabetes mellitus 214
pen for diabetes 48
pump for diabetes 214
syringe for diabetes 214
Internal bleeding 116
Intervertebral disks 133, 155
J
Jaw thrust 159
Jaws
dislocation 147
fractures 147
Jellyfish stings 207
Joints 135
injuries
dislocation 139
elbows 151
fingers 153
knees 164
shoulders 149
sprains 140–41
wrists 152
wounds in creases 127
K
Ketamine, overdose 201
Kidney failure, “crush syndrome”
118
Knees
bandaging 246
injuries 164
Knots, bandages 250
L
Labour, childbirth 228–29
Lacerations 111
Legislation 280
Legs
bandaging 243
cramp 167
examining for injury 51
hip and thigh 160–61
knee 164
lower leg 162–63
varicose veins 129
immobilizing 243
injuries
amputation 117
ankle sprain 140–41, 165
Level of response
impaired consciousness 144
monitoring 52
Ligaments 135
shoulder injuries 149
sprains 140–41
Lighter fuel, poisoning 201
Lightning 35
Limbs see Arms; Legs
Lips, burned 200
“Log-roll,” moving casualties 159
Low-voltage electricity 35
LSD, overdose 201
Lungs 90
airway obstruction 93
asthma 102
penetrating wounds 104–05
respiratory system 90–91
M
Major incidents 37
Marine stings 190, 207
Masks, in rescue breathing 69, 79
Mass gatherings 280
Mechanisms of injuries 43
Medical warning jewelry 48
Medication see Drugs
Meningitis 220, 266–67
Menstrual bleeding 128
Migraine 224
Miscarriage 128, 208, 228
Monitoring vital signs 52–53
Morphine, overdose 201
Mosquitoes 205
Mouth 198
bleeding from 125
burned lips 200
examining for injury 50
insect stings 204, 205
internal bleeding 116
knocked-out tooth 125
sore throat 225
toothache 225
Mouth-to-mouth breathing
see Rescue breathing
Mouth-to-nose rescue breathing 69, 79
Mouth-to-stoma rescue breathing 69
Moving casualties 234
hip and thigh injuries 160–61
lower leg injuries 162–63
“log-roll” 159
splints 160
Multiple casualties 31
Muscles 134
ruptures 140
stitch 226
strains 140–41
tears 140
N
Nails, checking circulation 243
Narcotics, overdose 201
Narrow-fold bandages 249
Neck
back pain 156
286
INDEX
Neck continued
examining for injury 50–51
spinal injury 157–59
whiplash injury 42
Needles, sharps containers 18
Nervous system 142–43
seizures 216–17
children 218
spinal injury 157–59
stroke 212–13
structure 142–43, 155
see also Brain; Unconsciousness
Nose 193
examining for injury 50
foreign object in 197
fractures 147
internal bleeding 116
mouth-to-nose rescue breaths
69, 79
Nosebleed 124, 147
O
Occupational Safety and Health Act
(1971, OSHA) 280
Open fractures 136
treatment 138
Orifices, bleeding from
ear 123
mouth 125
nose 124
vagina 128
Over-breathing,
 hyperventilation 101
Overdose, drug 201
Oxygen
breathing 56
circulatory system 56, 90
hypoxia 92
respiratory system 90–91
P
Painkillers, overdose 201
Palm wounds 127
Panic attacks, hyperventilation 101
Acetaminophen, overdose 201
Pelvis
examining for injury 51
fractures 155
Pepper spray injury 181
Peripheral nerves 143
Personal belongings 21
Pins 237
Placenta, delivery of 228, 229
Plants, poisonous 199
Platelets 109–10
Pneumothorax 104
Poisoning 190, 198–202
alcohol 202
chemicals on skin 199
drugs 201
emergency first aid 278–79
food 199
in eye 199
inhaled gases 199
injected poisons 199
plants 199
Poisoning continued
swallowed poisons 199, 200,
278–79
types of poison 199
Portuguese man-of-wars stings 207
Pregnancy
childbirth 208, 228–29
miscarriage 228
Pulse, checking 53
Puncture wounds 111
animal bites 203
marine stings 207
snake bites 206
R
Rabies 203
Radial pulse 53
Radiation burns 172
Radius 132
fractures 152
Reactions, delayed 25
Recovery position
adults 64–65
children 74–75
infants 81
spinal injuries 65, 75
Red blood cells 109
Regulations, first aid 280
Rescue breathing 59
adults 66–69
with chest compressions 66–69
children 76–79
with chest compressions 76–77
face shields 69, 79
infants 82–83
with chest compressions 83
mouth-to-nose 69, 79
mouth-to-stoma 69
pocket masks 69, 79
Respiratory system 88–105
airway obstruction 93
asthma 102, 268–69
breathing 91
choking 94–96
croup 103
disorders 92–105
drowning 100
hanging and strangulation 97
hyperventilation 101
hypoxia 92
inhalation of fumes 98–99
inhaled gases 199
penetrating chest wounds 104–05
Resuscitation
adults 62–71
chest compressions 66–71, 258–59
chest-compression-only CPR 70–71
CPR 66–71, 258–59
rescue breathing 68–69, 259
sequence chart 60
children 72–79
chest compressions 77–79, 261
CPR 76–77, 260–61
rescue breathing 76–77, 79,
260–61
sequence chart 61
choking 94–96
Resuscitation continued
defibrillators 84–86
infants 61, 80–83
chest compressions 83, 261
CPR 80–81, 260–61
rescue breathing 80–81, 260–61
sequence chart 61
priorities 57–8
recovery position 64–65, 74–75, 81
Rib cage, fractures 154
“RICE” procedure, strains and sprains
140, 141
Road accidents
see Traffic accidents
Roller bandages 236
applying 245–47
choosing correct size 244
elbow and knee 246
securing 244
Ruptured muscles 140
S
Safety
emergencies 28, 30
fires 32
moving casualties 234
personal 14
traffic accidents 30
Safety pins
securing roller bandages 244
Scalds 172
minor burns and scalds 176
severe burns and scalds 174–75
Scalp
examining for injury 50
wounds 122
Sciatica 156
Scissors 237
Scorpion sting 205
Scrapes 111
treatment 119
Sea anemone stings 207
Sea creatures, stings 207
Sea urchin spines 207
Seizures
absence seizures 216
in adults 216–17
in children 218
emergency first aid 276–77
Sensory organs 192–93
Serum 110
Sexual assault 128
Sharps containers 18
Shock 112–13
anaphylactic shock 223,
268–69
burns and 172
emergency first aid 274–75
Shoulders
dislocation 139
injuries 149
Signs, assessing a casualty 51
Skeleton 132–33 see also Bones
Skin
allergies 222
bites and stings 203–07
burns and scalds 172–81
287
INDEX
Skin continued
chemical burns 179, 199
embedded fishhooks 195
examining for injury 50
splinters 194
structure 170
sunburn 183
temperature control 171
Skull 133
examining for injury 50
fractures 144
see also Head injuries
Slings 251–53
elevation 252
improvised 253
Smoke 33
inhalation of 98–99
Snake bites 206
Soft tissue injuries
140–41
Solvents
inhalation of 98
poisoning 201
Sore throat 225
Spider bites 205
Spinal cord
injuries 157
nervous system 142–43
protection 142, 155
Spine 142
back pain 156
examining for injury
50–51
spinal injury 157–59
emergency first aid
272–73
moving casualty 159
recovery position 65
Splinters 194
Splints 160
Sprains 140–41
ankle 140–41, 165
cold compresses 141, 241
finger 153
shoulder 149
Square knots 250
Stab wounds 111
Sterile dressings 235
applying 239–40
Stimulants, overdose 201
Stings
allergy to 222
anaphylactic shock 223
insects 204–05
marine creatures 190, 207
Stitch 226
Stoma, mouth-to-stoma rescue
breaths 69
Strains, muscles 140–41
Strangulation 97
Stress, looking after yourself 24
Stroke 212–13
emergency first aid 262–63
Sunburn 183
Survival bags 237
Swallowed poisons 200, 201
emergency first aid 278–79
Symptoms, assess a casualty 51
Teeth
knocked out 125
sockets, bleeding 125
toothache 225
Telephoning 911 for help 22–23
Temperature, body 171
fever 219
frostbite 189
heat exhaustion 184
heatstroke 185
hypothermia 186–88
taking 53
Tendons 135
shoulder injuries 149
Tetanus 119, 203
Thermometers 53
Thighs, fractures 160–61
Throat
insect stings 204, 205
sore 225
see also Airways
Tibia 132
fractures 162–63
Tick bites 205
Toes see Feet
Tooth sockets, bleeding 125
Toothache 225
Traffic accidents 30–31
safety 28, 30
Tranquilizers
overdose 201
Transient ischemic attack
 (TIA) 212
Travel, air travel 225
Triangular bandages 236, 249–53
folding 249
hand and foot cover 250
slings 251–52
square knots 250
storing 249
Tubular bandages 236
applying 248
Tweezers 237
U
Ulna 132
fractures 152
Ultraviolet light, flash burns
to eye 181
Umbilical cord, childbirth 229
Unconsciousness
cerebral compression 144
checking response 44, 62, 72, 80
choking 94–96
concussion 144
diabetes mellitus 214, 215
emergency first aid 256, 258–61
examining casualties 49–51
impaired consciousness 144
penetrating chest wound 105
recovery position
adult 64–65
child 74–75
infant 81
seizures in adults 216–17
seizures in children 218
Unconsciousness continued
skull fracture 144
spinal injury 157–59
stroke 212–13
see also Resuscitation
Urethra, internal bleeding 116
V
Vaginal bleeding 116, 128
childbirth 229
miscarriage 228
Varicose veins, bleeding 129
Veins 104
bleeding 110
varicose veins 129
Vertebrae 133
injuries 157
Vital signs, monitoring 52–53
Vomiting 227
W
Wasp stings 204
allergy to 222
Waste material 18
Water
drowning 100
electrical injuries 35
hypothermia 186
rescue from 36
Weever fish spines 207
Whiplash injury 42
White blood cells 109
“Wind chill factor” 186
Windpipe see Airway
Work, first aid at 280–81
Wounds
abdominal 128
amputation 117
animal bites 203
at joint creases 127
blood clotting 110
chest 104–05
cross infection 16–18
crush injuries 118
cuts and scrapes 119
dressing and bandaging 238–50
emergency first aid 270–71
eyes 123
fingers 126
foreign objects 115, 121
head injury 144–45
healing 110
impalement 117
infection 120
palm 127
scalp and head 122
severe bleeding 114–15
types of 111
Wrist
bandages 247
injuries 152
T
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
288
AUTHORS OF 5TH EDITION
St. John Ambulance
Dr. Margaret Austin dstj lrcpi lrsci lm
Deputy Chief Medical Officer
St. Andrew’s First Aid
Mr. Rudy Crawford mbe bsc (hons) mb chb frcs
(glasg) fcem
Chairman of the Board
British Red Cross
Dr. Vivien J. Armstrong mbbs drcog frca
pgce (fe)
Chief Medical Adviser
CONTRIBUTORS TO THE 5TH EDITION
Dr. Meng Aw-Yong bsc mbbs dfms dfmb
Medical Adviser, St. John Ambulance
Jim Dorman
Operations Director, St. Andrew's First Aid
Joe Mulligan Head of First Aid Education, British
Red Cross
TRIPARTITE COMMERCIAL COMMITTEE
St. John Ambulance
Richard Evens
Director of Training
Richard Fernandez
Head of Strategic Communications
Andrew New
Commercial Project Manager
St. Andrew’s First Aid
Helen Forrest
Head of Marketing
Jim Dorman
Operations Director
British Red Cross
Anne McColl
Director of Education
Jude Holmes
Head of Education Marketing
AUTHORS’ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to extend special thanks to: the Clinical Directorate of St. John Ambulance; Stewart Simpson, Training Manager,
St. Andrew’s First Aid; Joslyn Kofi Opata, Administrator British Red Cross; Dr. Sarah Davidson, Head of Psychosocial Support, British
Red Cross; Jane Keogh, Production Development Manager, First Aid Education, British Red Cross.
PUBLISHERS’ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
DK Publishing would like to thank: Sanjay Chauhan and Duncan Turner for design assistance; Daniel Stewart for organizing locations
for photography; Sneha Sunder Benjamin for editorial assistance; Pallavi Singh and Vineetha Mokkil for proofreading; Sachin Gupta
for technical assistance, and Bev Speight and Nigel Wright of XAB Design for art direction of the original photography shoots.
DK Publishing would also like to thank the following people who appear as models:
Lyndon Allen, Gillian Andrews, Kayko Andrieux, Mags Ashcroft, Nicholas Austin, Neil Bamford, Jay Benedict, Dunstan Bentley, Joseph
Bevan, Bob Bridle, Gerard Brown, Helen Brown, Jennifer Brown, Val Brown, Michelle Burke, Tamlyn Calitz, Tyler Chambers, Evie Clark,
Tim Clark, Junior Cole, Sue Cooper, Linda Dare, Julia Davies, Simon Davis, Tom Defrates, Louise Dick, Jemima Dunne, Maria Elia, Phil
Fitzgerald, Alex Gayer, John Goldsmid, Nicholas Hayne, Stephen Hines, Nicola Hodgson, Spencer Holbrook, Jennifer Irving, Dan James,
Megan Jones, Dallas Kidman, Carol King, Ashwin Khurana, Andrea Kofi-Opata, Andrews Kofi-Opata, Edna Kofi-Opata, Joslyn KofiOpata, Tim Lane, Libby Lawson, Wren Lawson-Foley, Daniel Lee, Crispin Lord, Danny Lord, Harriet Lord, Phil Lord, Gareth Lowe,
Mulkina Mackay, Ethan Mackay-Wardle, Ben Marcus, Catherine McCormick, Fiona McDonald, Alfie McMeeking, Cath McMeeking,
Archie Midgley, David Midgley, Eve Mills, Erica Mills, Gary Moore, Sandra Newman, Matt Robbins, Dean Morris, Eva Mulligan, Priscilla
Nelson-Cole, Rachel NG, Emma Noppers, Phil Ormerod, Julie Oughton, Rebekah Parsons-King, Stefan Podohorodecki, Tom Raettig,
Andrew Roff, Ian Rowland, Phil Sergeant, Vicky Short, Lucy Sims, Gregory Small, Andrew Smith, Emily Smith, Sophie Smith, Bev
Speight, Silke Spingies, Michael Stanfield, Alex Stewart, Adam Stoneham, David Swinson, Hannah Swinson, Laura Swinson, Becky
Tennant, Laura Tester, Pip Tinsley, Daniel Toorie, Helen Thewlis, Fiona Vance, Adam Walker, Jonathan Ward, David Wardle, Dion
Wardle, Francesca Wardell, Angela Wilkes, Liz Wheeler, Jenny Woodcock, Nigel Wright, Nan Zhang.
Picture credits DK Publishing would like to thank the following for their kind permission to reproduce their photographs: Getty
Images: Andrew Boyd 168–69.
All other images © Dorling Kindersley. For further information see www.dkimages.com
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF EMERGENCY
PHYSICIANS
Gina M. Piazza do, facep
Medical Editor-in-Chief
Robert Heard mba, cae
Associate Executive Director, Membership and
Education Division
Marta Foster
Director, Educational Products